
                               1 of 17 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                          September 11, 2001, Tuesday

RELIGIOUS BLOODLETTING CLAIMS 165 LIVES IN NIGERIA HEARTLAND AFTER WEEKEND OF
RIOTS SECTARIAN CLASHES GRIPS NIGERIA AFTER 160 DEATHS

BYLINE: Anne Penketh A soldier confronting a suspected troublemaker in Jos,
where religious violence has erupted Saurabh Das/AP

SECTION: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 590 words


A NEW round of sectarian bloodletting erupted in Nigeria yesterday when
thousands of Muslim youths rioted in Kano after more than 160 people were
believed killed during three days of Christian-Muslim unrest in the central city
of Jos.

Although Nigerian officials put the death toll at 51 from the riots that broke
out in Jos during Friday's prayers, there were fears the number of dead could
run into the hundreds. A Red Cross official said 165 bodies had been taken to
mortuaries in Jos, a largely Christian city that has resisted plans adopted in
northern Nigeria to apply strict Islamic law.

Alarmingly, the clashes yesterday spread to the northern city of Kano, where
about 5,000 Muslim youths set on fire a church and cars to avenge the deaths of
their Muslim brethren.

Nigeria is no stranger to religious riots: Africa's most populous nation has
been torn by sectarian unrest since February last year, when the mainly Muslim
states in the north began observing the Islamic law, Sharia. The decision to
implement Sharia in the northern state of Kaduna triggered clashes that left
between 2,000 and 3,000 dead. Twelve states now observe the law.

Religious tension had risen in Jos after a Muslim was appointed chairman of a
state poverty-reduction committee. According to one report, the violence broke
out when a Christian woman tried to cross the street where Muslim men had
gathered outside the mosque. Youths went on the rampage, burning down mosques
after an unsubstantiated rumour that a church had been set alight.

Christian mobs were meanwhile reported to have gone from house to house in the
Congo-Russia district, asking residents to recite Bible verses. Households
thought to be those of Christians were left intact but hundreds of Muslim homes
were looted and burnt.

Tension was still high in the city of four million people yesterday where armed
soldiers patrolled the streets under a dusk-to-dawn curfew. Thousands of Jos
residents have fled their homes, and are sheltering in schools and military
bases.

Soldiers fired shots into the air outside the city's biggest mosque to repel
crowds of young Muslim men who had gathered near the Massalachi Juma. Youths
could be seen walking past soldiers, raising their hands in the air to show they
were unarmed. Charred bodies and burnt-out cars were still strewn in the streets
of Jos, where the site of the original conflict was nothing but a blackened
ruin.

A Christian, Alphonsus Sharif Okafor, whose pharmacy was burnt down, said: "We
Christians lived with Muslims for all our lives without any problem. I only pray
we can do it again."

In Kano, a pastor said: "They (youths) just came in with their weapons and
petrol in cans and asked everybody out before setting the church ablaze. Nobody
could stop them, they were heavily armed," James Alalade, the pastor, said.

The two-year-old government of President Olusegun Obasanjo has been plagued by
outbreaks of inter-ethnic violence, as years of social resentment that had
simmered previously under military rule burst into the open and threatened the
country's stability.

He condemned the violence yesterday. "I wonder what sort of Muslims and
Christians start burning churches and mosques - places where God is worshipped?"
he said. "True believers in God cannot start killing other human beings," he
added.

A former Nigerian military ruler, Yakubu Gowon - a Christian northerner himself
- was engaged in talks with various groups involved in an effort to stop the
violence.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2001 Independent Print Ltd


                               2 of 17 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                           September 27, 2002, Friday

CITIZENSHIP: FRONT LINE - A CHANCE TO EXPLORE TOPICAL ISSUES';
 THE VIEW FROM THE CLASSROOM.

BYLINE: Sarah Bamford

SECTION: FEATURES

LENGTH: 601 words


One of the main challenges of citizenship teaching is its reluctance to fit
neatly into a lesson format that can squeeze into already over-stretched
timetables. The subject itself is nebulous, crossing departmental boundaries yet
defining a whole school agenda. For me this is also what makes it interesting
and exciting. While there is a clear knowledge content to the curriculum, there
is also a requirement to include student participation and the development of
skills, much of which cannot be taught in the traditional classroom setting.

I trained last year to teach citizenship, but as citizenship is not necessarily
a timetabled subject, most of my classroom experience was gained in humanities.
These subjects have a number of links and overlaps with the requirements of
citizenship and provide opportunities to engage students in topical debate. The
Civil War and the rise of Parliament link very nicely with the role of
Parliament today, and the French Revolution has obvious links with human rights
teaching.

Meanwhile, studying the effects of globalisation is a requirement of both the
geography and the citizenship curricula. I discovered that distributing
chocolate to students in proportion to the respective gross domestic products of
continents provoked a near riot from "Africa" and "Asia", when population
increases meant their chocolate allocations had to be shared. This outrage
prompted a stimulating debate about global poverty, world trade and our
responsibilities as world citizens.

Fortunately, the citizenship agenda of political literacy, social and moral
responsibility, and community participation strongly underpins my school's
ethos. Citizenship is delivered through almost all the curriculum subjects, as
well as in specific citizenship/personal, social and health education (PSHE)
lesson time.

In addition, students are learning the skills of active citizenship and
political literacy through a series of meetings which encourage them to have
their voice heard and which provide opportunities for participation in their
school community. Small group mentor meetings of two to three students feed into
larger, class-sized "learning team meetings", which then feed into the year
councils and the school council.

Students have not necessarily embraced citizenship. It proved a challenge to my
diplomatic skills to guide the seven self-selected school council members away
from the idea of a benign oligarchy to trusting in the democratic process as a
means of expanding the school council. Giving this small group of committed (but
unelected) students the title of school council steering committee, who will now
advise the elected school council, has not only proved effective in allowing
democracy to flourish, but has also enabled those students to practise the
skills of project management.

What excites me about citizenship teaching is the opportunity to explore topical
and controversial issues with students. Encouraging students to think for
themselves and to express their thoughts in a responsible and informed way feels
like one of the most useful things any teacher can be doing.

It can be frustrating, however. Despite my best efforts to highlight the moral
issues, one class stalwart insists that not having a Sony PlayStation 2 could
justify stealing one. The student argued cogently, so has demonstrated the
skills outlined in the curriculum. It is my job to help him focus a little less
on his skills and a little more on his understanding.

Sarah Bamford is humanities teacher at Peacehaven Community School, East Sussex

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2002 Independent Print Ltd


                               3 of 17 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 29, 2001, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

WORLD

BYLINE: From News ServicesSHIPWRECK; RECOVERY; VICTIMS; RESCUE; RIOT AFRICA;
AIRPLANE CRASH; DEATH; FATALITY; DOMINICAN; REPUBLIC PERU; PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A4

LENGTH: 611 words



EUROPE

UKRAINE

22 bodies are recovered after ship sinks

Rescuers recovered 22 bodies from the Black Sea off Ukraine on Sunday after a
ship traveling from Istanbul, Turkey, to a port in Ukraine's Crimea apparently
sank, officials said early today.

A Coast Guard official said a lifeboat and a life raft from the ship, the Pamyat
Mercuria, had been found off the coast. Twenty-two people had died from exposure
and six people were still alive, including the captain of the vessel, he said.

The official quoted the captain as saying the ship had sunk on Saturday evening
but gave no reason.

The Coast Guard said the 1,200-ton ship had once been a survey ship but had been
converted into a ferry for traders shuttling between Istanbul and Crimea.

AFRICA

TANZANIA

Gunfire again breaks out in archipelago of Zanzibar

A second day of heavy gunfire broke out on the archipelago of Zanzibar on Sunday
in what opposition leaders said were clashes between police and protesters
calling for new elections.

As many as 24 people, including a police officer, were killed in battles Friday
and Saturday between police and protesters, said Nassor Seis, a senior official
with the opposition Civic United Front.

It was not immediately known whether there were any casualties from Sunday's
fighting. In Wete on the northern island of Pembe, where gunfire broke out at
6:30 a.m. Sunday, witnesses said police went house to house beating residents
and looting. They did not want their names used.

NORTH AMERICA

CANADA

Russia is asked to waive immunity of accused envoy

Canada has asked Russia to waive the immunity of a diplomat accused of drunken
driving in a car accident that killed one pedestrian and injured another, the
Canadian foreign minister said Sunday.

The diplomat, 45, who was not identified, was released after the accident
Saturday in which police said the car he was driving jumped a curb and hit two
women walking with a dog on a sidewalk.

The diplomat was ordered to appear in court March 7 on charges of suspicion of
impaired driving causing death and injury, refusing to take a sobriety test and
criminal negligence causing death, Ottawa police Sgt. Dave Collins said.

Under the Vienna Convention, diplomats and their families can be charge d with
crimes but are immune from criminal prosecution and civil liability.

CARIBBEAN

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Plane crash kills 7; some may be illegal immigrants

A small plane that authorities suspect was carrying illegal immigrants to the
United States crashed Sunday in the Dominican Republic, killing at least seven
people.

The twin-engine plane left Santo Domingo in the morning and crashed in the
mountainous Tamboril region, about 125 miles north of the capital, Civil
Aviation director Anibal Amparo Garcia Diaz said.

While the flight plan said the plane was heading to the resort town of Puerto
Plata with a pilot and two passengers aboard, seven bodies were found, and the
pilot named in the flight plan was not on board, Garcia Diaz said.

SOUTH AMERICA

PERU

Former President Garcia returns to run again

Former President Alan Garcia bounced back into Peru this weekend, seeking to
regain the presidency in elections April 8. The winner replaces Alberto
Fujimori, who resigned after a scandal.

Garcia arrived on Saturday from nine years exile in Colombia to a tumultuous
welcome from tens of thousands of supporters of his leftist American Popular
Revolutionary Alliance party.

Many analysts believe Garcia, who ruled from 1985 to 1990, will give favorite
Alejandro Toledo a serious contest.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

NOTES: NATION & WORLD

TYPE: World Briefs Column

                  Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                               5 of 17 DOCUMENTS


                           The Sunday Times (London)

                                January 21, 2007

After a whale of a time, we'll be back for more

BYLINE: Jono Coleman

SECTION: FEATURES; South Africa; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 421 words


One family -me, my wife Margot, Oscar, 12, and Emily, 9 -one week, one very
large country, writes Jono Coleman. How did we fare on our first South African
holiday?

First, Sun City, the legendary golf and gambling oasis about two hours' drive
from Johannesburg. We stayed at the Palace of the Lost City, the smartest and
newest hotel, a riot of Africa-meets-Disney decor -completely over the top in
the best possible way.

The kids loved it and the huge breakfasts kept us fuelled all day for activities
including a Segway bike safari round the Sun City complex -it's like riding on a
stepladder with wheels, but not as easy as that sounds -and the elephant
sanctuary where we got to meet and feed elephants, a great bonding moment for
our family.

Next stop was Makakatana Bay Lodge set in the Greater St Lucia Wetland Park on
the Indian Ocean coast. It accommodates just 12 guests in air-conditioned lodges
with outside showers. We got up at 6am to go and watch whales -the standout
South Africa experience for us. We were picked up from the beach by a super-fast
boat and then surfed through the breaking waves as we went out to sea.

Within 20 minutes of heading out, we had two huge whales frolicking around our
boat. Emily took pictures as the giant creatures surfaced right next to it, then
disappeared back under again. It was just like a wildlife film but we were in
it.

In the two hours we spent out on the ocean, we had up to four whales following
the boat and playing kiss chase with us and each other.

Strangely, we found this a much more exciting and moving experience than going
on safari. We did this at Pilanesberg, a game reserve of more than 100,000 acres
next door to Sun City, rather than fitting in more travelling to stay at a lodge
in one of the larger reserves. We saw some wonderful animals -baby elephant,
cheetah and hyenas.

We would return to Sun City and the brilliant Makakatana Bay Lodge without
hesitation, but also want to explore more of the wilderness. I even bought a
presidential shirt just like Nelson Mandela wears, at the Sun City gift shop.

Broadcaster and columnist Jono Coleman and his family travelled with Africa
Travel Centre (0845 450 5705, www.africatravel.co.uk). A similar trip with three
nights at The Palace of the Lost City, four nights on safari at Makakatana Bay
Lodge, return flights with BA and Budget hire car costs from £ 5,095 for a
family of four, based on two adults and two children under 12 years

ONLINE EXTRA More family-friendly options: timesonline. co.uk/southafrica2007

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               6 of 17 DOCUMENTS


                                   Mail Today

                             June 5, 2010 Saturday

Breathless wait for World Cup to begin

BYLINE: by S. Kannan

LENGTH: 762  words


L AST week, a PR company had come to my office with a bagful of promotional
literature and CDs on the FIFA World Cup and South African tourism. It had all
the information which millions of football lovers across the globe already have.
The one item he handed at the end was the vuvuzela , with the South African
national colours on it.

I looked at it a bit puzzled, not knowing whether my lung capacity was enough to
get that trumpet working. And when it did, the decibel level was a reminder of
how the hosts are going to be partying all month long as the top 32 teams of the
world fight it out for the most prized possession in football.

If this was the sound which comes from one vuvuzela , I bet when thousands of
fans are packed inside each of the 10 venues in South Africa like sardines in a
tin, it's going to be nothing but a riot.

Africa has been seen in isolation all along in many ways.

And the funny part is there are still Doubting Thomasses who wonder why the
World Cup of the world's most beautiful game had to be taken to South Africa.
Till four months back,  newspapers in the United Kingdom were writing negatively
about the host nation.

But with FIFA, the governing body, having imposed faith in South Africa, the
world is eagerly waiting for the kick- off on the big day - June 11.

Agreed, travel agents at home and abroad have been offering tourism plus
football packages for the World Cup, but there are certain facts about South
Africa which still scare you.

The host nation is known for its dangerous levels of crime, even though over
10,000 additional police officers have been deployed to ensure nothing goes
wrong.

Then again, for a country which has a global record HIV/ AIDS population of 5.7
million out of 49 million and the kind of poverty that accompanies an
unemployment rate of 35.4 per cent, the World Cup is going to be a blessing in
disguise. More so, with the growth rate of their economy now at a healthy level.

Talk of the riveting action which one is going to witness, you could be sure for
Africa as a continent, this will be one major moment of celebration.

The football World Cup has never travelled this far and conditions could be
demanding even for the superstars who make millions from club football in
Europe.

Temperature and high altitude will be factors at most venues, barring Cape Town
and Durban, which are port cities.

Then again, as a professional competing at the highest level, one can never
really complain about conditions.

Old- timers recall how in Mexico in 1986, games kicked off at noon despite
temperatures in some of the venues topping 38 degrees Celsius. At that time,
Maradona, who led his country to the title, protested. But by then, TV ratings
had become so important that traditional evening kick- offs were done away with.

Even before the World Cup kick- off, there is bad news.

Didier Drogba is almost out and Ivory Coast is already in mourning. Bad luck
continues to dog Rio Ferdinand, and he is also going to be sorely missed.

But this is the World Cup, where one can't let the negatives overshadow the
thrilling action in store. Today, when every top European club has huge
viewership, it is not a European who earns the megabucks.

It is none other than Samuel Eto'o, whose phoenix like rise from a Cameroon slum
to international stardom is a testament as to how football can easily be
accessed. Unlike many other sports, you can kick a ball on any surface to begin
with and chart your path to glory. For all the 38 African nations, Eto'o is the
ultimate symbol of supremacy in football, which is a very different and
democratic sport.

Over this one month period starting June 11, analysis, post mortems, tweets,
posts on Facebook, sms and various chats are going to dissect every match of the
World Cup.

While football is seen as a sport which can make you forget your pains and
misery, it's hard to ignore one mad moment in 1994 when a Colombian player
Andres Escobar was murdered in Medellin after inadvertently scoring for an
opposing team in that year's World Cup.

Nobody wants to see anything like this happen, but perhaps Lionel Messi ( below)
will mesmerise the opposition and captivate the global audience again and again.

We talk of megabucks being splurged in the Indian Premier League. But here we
have Messi, just five feet seven inches with an annual earning of $ 13 million.
Yet, all this pales into insignificance because here at the World Cup, it is not
about what you make. It's going to be about what you can do to clinch the
trophy.

So try and find a vuvuzela from somewhere and cheer your team on.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2010 Mail Today, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                               7 of 17 DOCUMENTS


                                  Morning Star

                            August 16, 2011 Tuesday

Standon delivers

BYLINE: Vincent Dignan

SECTION: CULTURE

LENGTH: 372 words


Like Secret Garden Party, Bestival, or any of the other festivals which offer a
blockbooking of big bands, everyone who goes to Standon will have a slightly
different narrative of experiences. Many will talk about the swimming pool, the
sporadic dance troupes or insane architecture overlooking the whole thing, let
alone the many stages of leftfield bands. There's a life-threateningly packed
front section for Washed Out, whose bastardised chillwave notes make for one of
the festival shows of the summer.

It may be curiosity more than outright devotion, but Ernest Greene has captured
the zeitgeist. Dananananaykroyd are still one of the most fun bands in Britain.
The songs may be a little samey, but the stage dynamic and banter can't fail to
put smiles on even the most jaded hipster's faces. The ever-amazing but sadly
overlooked Chrome Hoof were busy being the most amazing band in the world and
beheading aliens on the Friday night, before the mind-bending Battles proved
they were a shrewd booking - a real experience to see headlining a festival.
Saturday's standout performance came from East London's IROK - formed from the
ashes of the legendary Dead Kids, the five-piece of two drummers, two
keyboardists and unhinged frontman Mike Title - who smashed it like no band
before. With songs like the catchy but unsettling All My Children, expect them
to be tearing up a whole lot more festivals next year. Meanwhile, Egyptian
Hiphop have the chin-strokers swarming their stage to make their own judgments
of the new hyped sensation, playing just after the always excellent Sound Of
Rum, who are as sincere as they are groovy. Kate Tempest represents the voice of
a generation, and needless to say she had much comment on the recent London
riots. Africa Express Sound System bring an all-star group of musicians to close
the festival following Spiritualized's unfortunate cancellation, and perfectly
encapsulate how you don't have to be a million-selling rock band to close a
festival. The Standon Calling crowd came to experience something different - and
to party inside a barn - and of course, the million other experiences they had
will be by now tales of folklore, all ending with the line "We should come back
next year."

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2011 People's Press Printing Society Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                               8 of 17 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                              May 30, 2008, Friday

Business briefs

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P2C

LENGTH: 688 words


Hackers take over Comcast.net site briefly

NEW YORK - Hackers took over and defaced Comcast Corp.'s Web portal for several
hours overnight, leaving a cryptic message on the site that the company's 14.1
million subscribers use to access e-mail, news and technical support.

The front page of Comcast.net went down shortly before 11 p.m. Wednesday and was
replaced with a note saying the hackers had "RoXed" Comcast, according to
postings at BroadbandReports.com.

Comcast spokeswoman Jennifer Khoury said late Thursday morning the hijacking had
been reversed, but some users were still unable to access Comcast.net and
Web-based e-mail.

There was no indication that e-mail or other private information was compromised
by the attack, Comcast said.

The hackers appeared to have seized control of the Comcast.net domain name at
registrar Network Solutions Inc. and redirected it to other servers, Khoury
said.

World Bank helping with global food crisis

WASHINGTON - The World Bank is stepping up efforts to help overcome the global
food crisis by providing an extra $1.2 billion in grants and loans.

To deal with immediate and long-term food problems, the bank said Thursday it
will increase its overall support for agriculture and food aid to $6 billion
next year, up from $4 billion in 2008.

Robert Zoellick, president of the 185-nation lending organization, said as the
international community heads into a major U.N. summit in Rome next week to
address the global food problem, "there is a need for a clear action plan"
because "higher food prices are driving people and countries into danger."

He said aid should be provided to handle immediate humanitarian needs such as
seeing that pregnant women receive proper nutrition and children at school are
fed. He said longer-term help should go to small farmers to include seed and
fertilizer for the next planting season so they can increase their harvests.

"These initiatives will help address the immediate danger of hunger and
malnutrition for the 2 billion people struggling to survive in the face of
rising food prices and contribute to a longer-term solution that must involve
many countries and institutions," Zoellick said.

High oil prices, changing diets, urbanization, expanding populations, flawed
trade policies, extreme weather, growth in biofuel production and speculation
have sent food prices soaring worldwide. This has touched off food riots from
Africa to Asia and raised fears that uncounted millions will suffer
malnutrition.

Zoellick said the bank's board was approving grants Thursday to Djibouti, $5
million; Haiti, $10 million; and Liberia, $10 million. In the next week he said
grant support would be provided to Togo, Yemen and Tajikistan.

Possible copying of U.S. laptop under inquiry

WASHINGTON - U.S. authorities are investigating whether Chinese officials
secretly copied the contents of a government laptop computer during a visit to
China by Commerce Secretary Carlos M. Gutierrez and used the information to try
to hack into Commerce computers, officials and industry experts told The
Associated Press.

Surreptitious copying is believed to have occurred when a laptop was left
unattended during Gutierrez's trip to Beijing for trade talks in December,
people familiar with the incident told the AP. These people spoke on condition
of anonymity because the incident was under investigation.

Gutierrez told the AP on Thursday he could not discuss whether or how the
laptop's contents might have been copied.

"Because there is an investigation going on, I would rather not comment on
that," he said. "To the extent that there is an investigation going on, those
are the things being looked at, those are the questions being asked. I don't
think I should provide any speculative answers."

A Commerce Department spokesman, Rich Mills, said he could not confirm or deny
such an incident in China. Asked whether the department has issued new rules for
carrying computers overseas, Mills said: "The department is continuing to
improve our security posture, and that includes providing updates, guidances and
best practices to staff to maintain security."

Compiled from wire reports

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers


                               9 of 17 DOCUMENTS


                         The Straits Times (Singapore)

                           December 16, 2006 Saturday

...some cartoons in a Danish paper would set off riots from Africa to India

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 109  words


FEW people laughed when reprints of 12 cartoons first published by Denmark's
Jyllands-Posten newspaper last year spread around the world early this year.

One caricature depicted Prophet Muhammad as a crazed, knife-wielding Bedouin.
Another showed him at the gates of heaven telling suicide bombers: 'Stop. Stop.
We have run out of virgins!'

But hardly anyone expected that these drawings would lead to protests breaking
out from North Africa to the Indian subcontinent.

The strong reaction, which caught Western leaders by surprise, highlighted the
growing rift between Muslims and the West, prompting calls for more to be done
to boost understanding all round.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2006 Singapore Press Holdings Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               10 of 17 DOCUMENTS



                                 irishmirror.ie

                      February 6, 2015 Friday 4:15 PM GMT

AFCON: Equatorial Guinea fined £65,000 and given suspended ground closure after
semi-final riots;
The Africa Cup of Nations hosts lost 3-0 in the semi-final to Ghana but the
match was marred by intense crowd trouble which caused two stoppages

BYLINE: By Aaron Flanagan

SECTION: SPORT,SOCCER,SOCCER NEWS

LENGTH: 294 words


The Equatorial Guinea Football Federation have been fined $100,000 US (£65,000)
following their Africa Cup of Nations semi-final against Ghana on Thursday.

Play was stopped on two separate occasions as disgruntled fans of the host
nation began throwing missiles at the Ghana players and opposing supporters.

The Confederation of African Football (CAF) imposed the punishment on Friday and
also imposed a one-match suspended ground closure on Equatorial Guinea.

That ground closure will only be enforced should there be further crowd trouble
during Saturday's third-place play-off match against DR Congo, which will take
place at the Malabo Stadium, the same location as the Ghana match.

The semi-final was stopped early in the second half as riot police formed a
tunnel with their shields for the Black Stars squad to leave the field.

Crowd trouble in Equatorial Guinea vs Ghana

Play resumed before being stopped again eight minutes from time. Ghanaian
supporters were shepherded out of the stands and to the side of the pitch to
escape the vicious Equatorial Guinea support

Riot police were then drafted in, as police helicopters flew low over the
stands, a scene the Ghana Football Association described as "like a war zone".

Announcing the sanctions on its website, CAF said 36 Ghana supporters were hurt
after coming under attack from home supporters, with a further 14 taken to
hospital. One of those hospitalised is said to be under close observation.

The match was stopped for a total of 35 minutes, before it was played to a
conclusion once tempers calmed down. Ghana eventually progressed to Sunday's
final against the Ivory Coast with a 3-0 victory.

A first-half penalty from Jordan Ayew and second-half strikes from Wakaso
Mubarak and Andre Ayew sealed the victory.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBMGNIRIS


                      Copyright 2015 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               11 of 17 DOCUMENTS


                            The Star (South Africa)

                             March 27, 2015 Friday
                                   E1 Edition

Nigeria sails on rough seas

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 352 words


Riven by regional, ethnic and religious divisions since it attained independence
in 1960, Nigeria has a long tradition of overcoming difficulties that might
destroy other nations. But rarely has the state of the world's seventh most
populous country, and Africa's biggest economy, seemed more precarious than now,
as it prepares to elect a president tomorrow.

Pitting the incumbent Goodluck Jonathan against the former general Muhammadu
Buhari who was briefly president himself during the 1980s, the vote, in one
sense, is a rerun. The two faced each other in the country's last election in
2011, which Jonathan won with relative ease. This time, however - and unlike the
previous four elections since the country was returned from military
dictatorship to democracy in 1999 - the outcome is anything but a foregone
conclusion.

One reason for the uncertainty is the sheer scale of today's challenges. The
most obvious is the rampaging, murderous insurgency of Boko Haram in the Muslim
north of the country, which continues unabated despite signs that countries in
the region are uniting against this common threat. Arguably no less threatening
is the current price of oil - exports of the commodity have underpinned
Nigeria's economic performance in recent years.

To these contemporary ills must be added those that have bedevilled Nigeria from
the very start: the split between the poorer, less populous north and the
richer, Christian south that contains the bulk of its oil and other natural
resources; enduring ethnic differences that all too easily spill over into
violence; and endemic corruption.

Thus far, the rickety ship of state has held together. This time, however, the
seas are rougher than ever. The stakes are high, not just for a country but a
continent. Nigeria shapes perceptions of Africa as a whole. It has faced
comparable trials in the past, and somehow has muddled through.

This time, though, the muddling through may be messier than ever.

When Buhari lost to Jonathan in 2011, 800 people died in three days of riots.
Africa - and the world - hope this time around the poll will pass peacefully.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SW


                Copyright 2015 Independent Newspapers Pty (Ltd)
                              All Rights Reserved


                               14 of 17 DOCUMENTS


                           Daily Independent (Lagos)

                               September 06, 2014

Having More Women in Govt'll Change Nigeria - Alex-Oni

LENGTH: 1623 words


Adaobi Alex-Oni, is one gender activist who constantly and consistently reminds
women of their roles in the society. Adaobi, a former TV presenter, and brain
behind of Role of Women in Emerging African Democracies (ROWEAD), a think-tank
organisation which creates platform, for women in position to take bold steps
and make the right decisions, spoke to Senior Reporter, ANTHONIA SOYINGBE, on
her strides in her career ad life.

We cannot overlook the roles women have played over the years in enthroning
democracies all over Africa, and Nigeria is a peculiar country. The policies of
democracy actually begin at the grassroots. Growing up, I saw my mother trying
to galvanise the power of women in making decisions, even as small as my own
kindred. She was the voice to reckon with. In fact, it got to a stage that a lot
of decisions were approved because she took them.

Sometimes, when she comes back late from this political meetings, she tells me a
lot of women are timid and she needed to represent women well. She needed to
live by example, and that earned her a name Azuanuka, meaning, 'She does not
care what people say behind her'. The men would always push and want to
intimidate her, but she stood her ground and I watched and got inspired by her
leadership style. ROWEAD is a platform where questions that need definite
answers are asked. We have seen how elections are conducted and won; you find
very little representation of women. Election days become days to sit at home
and cook for our husbands and take care of children. Voting period over, we
drive out to the cinema or go shopping without getting really involved in the
process.

I do not want to believe that we are less intelligent, or we are not capable to
compete the way our men will compete. I say it is not about empowerment any
more; it is not about liberation of women anymore. We have been liberated a long
time. We should be seen as equal partners, working side by side with men. We are
not asking that we should be enthroned above men, or that we should take over.
No! Nature has endowed us with this gift of always pulling back to access
situations. We don't pull back out of cowardice or because we are not strong
enough. We must be seen as those who are able to strike a balance; we can be
multi-tasking.

ROWEAD wants to answer these questions, we have sought to create a platform that
looks and analyses the role women ought to play in democracies. That is why in
our just-concluded conference, we brought women who have lived through this
experience, who have walked in the shoes of men. They should tell us if we are
not adequate enough.

The ROWEAD slogan is to arouse the consciousness of the woman to show her that
she can make a change; she is an agent of change. I tell you the truth, if women
have more roles in government, Nigeria will not be the same. Africa, in fact,
will not be the same. A woman started the Aba Women Riot. Africa for so long has
fought for democracy and here we are. We have democracy. We should protect it.
We are almost losing it. We do not want to look at this only from the Nigerian
angle.

I see ROWEAD as a standpoint for every productive and engaging agenda for the
women. I see ROWEAD being a platform that will project women agenda to search
for equality, to be partners, not that we want to take over. I see ROWEAD as a
voice that will bridge a lot of gap between the corporate and the civilians. I
see ROWEAD as a lot of things. I see ROWEAD as a platform that will propel women
forward, help the youths and give a voice to suggestions that will help our
government. I see ROWEAD advising and challenging the government not only in
Nigeria, but globally. Some parts of Africa are clamouring for ROWEAD
conference, they have also contacted us. So, we are looking beyond Nigeria.
Africa is the motherland and we must first of all protect her. Nigeria has
always been the big brother of other African countries. But now, it is time for
the big brother to be given help to. If we stand back and Nigeria goes down,
most African countries will also go down. The world is global, so we cannot
afford to be on our own anymore.

Like everything in life, sometimes you have to move on. Sometimes in every point
of your life, you draw the curtain for a certain aspect and move on. I never
left TV; I left Jukebox and started working with Patrick Oke. In fact, I was the
first female to anchor his NDDC News if you watch it on Channels TV. You know
when you are a journalist; you are a journalist to heart. I never really left. I
got involved in private productions. But, I will tell you something about my
on-screen life. They were the best moments of my life and I won't trade them for
anything in the world. But also I am happier and fulfilled where I am right now.
Being a mother is all I ever wanted; but that didn't keep me from doing that TV
programme. But, being on TV, I discovered there was something about me that I
took for granted. I never knew that I had a nice smile until people were saying
it. I never was a people's person until people started saying it.

You know, on that programme, I mended relationships and broken hearts. I reached
out to the very poor. But for me, the height of all that was the bomb blast at
the Ikeja Cantonment. You know, I had come to work that morning, I watched the
news and people were crying and I called my producer and asked: Will it be okay
if I go to this spot and do Jukebox today? There were much tears, let us play
music. Let me go to this people, and let them laugh. Let us see if we could in
some way ease their pain. He agreed and to be frank with you, I never knew how
popular I was. I was practically moved; women who were crying forgot they were
crying. Men who were searching and looking for their children, forgot they were
looking for their children and everybody were hugging me and saying, 'Oh! Adaobi
Jukebox is here. I shed tears; I didn't believe how much impact. For me, that
was the height of my career.

A lot has changed, but not so much really in camera roles and focus. The
presenters are trying but they don't tend to be themselves. There are a lot of
copycats; there is a lot of fake phonetics going on right now. I mean, we don't
speak American English. The thing is, you must speak in clarity. That should be
the basic. You must speak in such a manner that you come across presentable. It
doesn't really matter if you are going to add all the phonetics. Be natural as
you can be and I believe that was what sold me on that programme, being myself.
That carved a niche for me. Even for those who came after me, they had a
problem. I remember onece I got an e-mail asking why the new presenters were
trying to sound like Adaobi. They had that problem and struggles. The bottomline
is: There is no originality. I'm sorry to say; but that is the hard truth.
Because there is no originality, it seems the content is shallow; but it is not.
They have fantastic content; but the way it comes across gives us worry and I
believe that they can do better.

We are fine, awesome and fantastic. I am married to somebody who complements me,
who takes all my shenanigans and turn them into something very is productive;
who supports me. If I tell you that most of the ideas for this ROWEAD came from
my husband, you won't believe me, because we've struck a balance and
understanding. He is a good man and I have two wonderful children with him, who
are my checkmates. They check me out really. I'm telling you, those boys are
something else. They are quite intelligent and I tell you, they are the best. I
am not saying because I am their mother; but, they are well behaved and I'm so
proud of them.

That brings me to the power of social media, ROWEAD has a strong presence in the
social media. it has to be the education of the woman's mind, to begin to
understand that she can do this. I ask questions but its because we are so
dormant about everything and we are like same, it can't be same all the time. So
when a young mind is activated to ask questions, then the young mind aspires to
bring a change. Nigeria just like in every other part of the world with our
cultural and societal structures. First of all, the woman is meant to believe
that she is not meant to come out and speak when others are speaking. Even in
the bible, the bible said, women should not be heard standing up to talk. These
are the things that society and nature has kind of push us against. Culture did
not just emanate from itself, people set that culture. And what is culture,
culture is rules and regulations that guide a certain people and so it was
somebody who sat down, who deliberated on this matter. You are talking about
Nigeria, it is not just Nigeria alone, Hillary Clinton was supposed to come out
as president but as a woman, we know the forces that she is facing .

Every morning I say a prayer,' I say God please as long as I am alive and as
long as I am in a situation that you have created which is another beautiful
day, don't let me pass a opportunity to help somebody, don't let me pass an
opportunity to do good. So I think my inspiration and motivation comes from
knowing that there is a God in me, that the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom. My motivation is that I am a catholic, I am particularly devoted to the
Blessed Virgin Mary .She is my inspiration, in Mary there is humility. There is
acceptance of things that you cannot change. If you recite the Holy Rosary, you
see that there are many promises that are promised and it is only if you are
humble, that you receive them and tell me where arrogance has taken anybody?
There are challenges I live with, I have fought my own battles in life, but then
I never give up on God, because he has never given up on me.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               15 of 17 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 3, 2002 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition

NATION/WORLD

BYLINE: From News Services

SECTION: NEWS; Nation/World Briefs Column; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 663 words


TYLER, Texas

2 journalists were wounded by man in burning home

A man who shot at firefighters working to extinguish a blaze at his home Tuesday
wounded a newspaper reporter and photographer covering the fire.

The suspect was killed by police, said Tyler police Officer Chris Moore.

Firefighters responding to the blaze found the suspect in the garage in a car
pointing a rifle at them, Moore said. The man, Fred Douglas Wallace, 73, began
shooting, striking reporter Shauna Wonzer in the leg. Photographer Herb Nygren
suffered a graze wound on his head. Both work for the Tyler Morning Telegraph.

Wallace lived alone, and no one else was in the home.

KLAMATH FALLS, Ore.

Security system replaces officers guarding water

A new security fence, video cameras and motion detectors have replaced federal
police officers at the headgates of the Klamath Reclamation Project, an
irrigation system.

The security system was completed last week around the project, run by the
Bureau of Reclamation. Last summer, farmers protested there against restrictions
on irrigation water as a safeguard for endangered fish.

Federal police were brought in after farmers pried open the headgates to an
irrigation canal and siphoned off water.

The $90,000 security system went up after protesters met with authorities after
the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11. The protesters agreed to scale back their
activities.

Private security guards will remain under federal contract through the middle of
this month, bureau spokesman David Jones said. After that, the bureau will
decide whether to rely solely on the fence, cameras and motion detectors, Jones
said.

WASHINGTON

Writer held for withholding notes appeals to high court

A novice crime writer jailed since July for withholding notes from a grand jury
has turned to the Supreme Court.

The writer, Vanessa Leggett, wants the court to let writers and reporters
protect the confidentiality of their sources.

She has refused to hand over her research for a book about the murder of a Texas
socialite. The research is being sought by a grand jury investigating the
victim's husband.

An appeals court has said a judge acted properly in jailing Leggett for contempt
of court. Leggett asked the Supreme Court this week to overturn that ruling.

Leggett, 33, has been in a Houston detention center since July 20. Although the
grand jury is expected to end its investigation Friday, prosecutors have said
they will oppose bail until Leggett complies with the subpoena.

BRAZIL

30 prisoners are killed in riot, authorities say

Rival gangs battled with makeshift knives, iron bars and guns in a prison in
western Brazil on Wednesday, and authorities said at least 30 inmates were
killed and 10 injured.

The uprising began in the morning at the Urso Branco Penitentiary near the
Rondonia state capital of Porto Velho, 1,520 miles northwest of Sao Paulo.

The inmates did not take hostages but said they would not return to their cells
until some 30 prisoners are transferred to other facilities, according to an
official at the prison affairs department. Prison rebellions are common in
Brazil, where conditions are poor and overcrowding is chronic.

GABON

Death toll rises to 23 in outbreak of Ebola

A 16-year-old boy died of Ebola in northeastern Gabon, raising the death toll to
23 in an outbreak of the disease in two Central African countries, health
officials said Wednesday.

Vivien Otolany died Sunday at an improvised isolation ward in Mekambo, about 465
miles northeast of the capital, Libreville, government and World Health
Organization officials said.

He was the sixth member of his family to die in the outbreak. His aunt, a nurse,
caught the disease from a patient, then spread it to her mother, brother, two
children and nephew. Medical officials have confirmed 20 Ebola cases, of whom 17
have died since October. Twelve other cases, including six fatalities, have been
identified in neighboring Republic of Congo.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2002

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                               16 of 17 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               September 21, 2002 Saturday Five Star Lift Edition

U.S. & WORLD DIGEST

BYLINE: From News Services

SECTION: NEWS ; U.S. & World Digest Column; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 842 words


SCOTTS VALLEY, Calif.

Tiger grabs boy's head during school assembly

A tiger grabbed a child by his head Friday at a school assembly, sending the
6-year-old boy to a hospital.

A trainer was leading the tiger from an auditorium at Baymonte Christian School
when it lurched over seats and grabbed the boy's head in its jaws, police Capt.
Harry Bidleman said.

The boy received stitches for a cut along his hairline, according to Dr. Phillip
Harter at Lucile Packard Children's Hospital in Palo Alto.

The appearance of the tiger, which was in the custody of Zoo to You Wildlife
Education Inc., was a reward for students who sold magazine subscriptions.

ANNISTON, Ala.

Army postpones burning of old chemical weapons

The Army has postponed plans to begin burning Cold War-era chemical weapons at
its new incinerator next month, citing new objections from state environmental
officials.

The Army's spokesman for the project, Mike Abrams, said burning probably will
not begin until after Jan. 1.

The Army had planned to begin destroying 2,254 tons of deadly chemical weapons
at the Anniston Army Depot in late October. But on Sept. 12, the state
Department of Environmental Management asked for a delay, complaining that the
Army's laboratory burn tests were not done according to the procedure approved
by the agency. Abrams said the tests will be redone to meet the state's
objections.

BARNESVILLE, Ga.

Suspicious devices prompt evacuation of hundreds

Several blocks in downtown Barnesville were evacuated Friday as police and bomb
units investigated several suspicious devices.

Georgia Bureau of Investigation agent Rusty Andrews said eight or nine canisters
were found over a three- or four-block area in Barnesville, a town of about
6,000 people 50 miles south of Atlanta.

A bomb squad detonated four of the devices, but no live explosives were found.
They were described as 4-by-9-inch canisters, with red and white wires and
size-C batteries attached. Several hundred people were evacuated and 15
businesses closed Friday.

CUBA

Forecasters warn of floods from Hurricane Isidore

Hurricane Isidore pounded Cuba's sparsely populated western end with heavy rains
and winds of more than 100 mph Friday, making its way toward the Gulf of Mexico
and prompting the evacuation of offshore oil rigs.

Forecasters warned of possible flooding along Cuban shores from a storm surge of
as much as 12 feet, and dangerously large waves were expected near where Isidore
made landfall Friday afternoon.

"Some strengthening is expected during the next 24 hours," the National
Hurricane Center in Miami said.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

27 inmates die in riot at overcrowded prison

A riot in an overcrowded Dominican prison Friday left at least 27 inmates dead
and 48 others injured, 12 critically, authorities said. Most of the deaths were
by smoke inhalation.

The riot erupted in the state prison in La Vega, 75 miles northwest of Santo
Domingo, after officials announced a surprise sweep for weapons. Several inmates
became violent after guards entered the first cell, Army Chief Luciano Diaz
said.

The inmates stuffed mattresses and bed sheets through the locked prison bars and
set the items ablaze. Prison officials tried to open the cell blocks but the
flames prevented them, Attorney General Virgirio Bello Rosa said. One badly
burned inmate died after being rushed to a local hospital.

The prison was built for 300 people but now houses 545.

LIBERIA

Chauffeur who hit dog is ordered killed, fiancee says

A chauffeur for Liberian President Charles Taylor's son was beaten to death
after damaging his employer's car, the victim's fiancee and officials said
Friday.

Isaac Gono was ordered killed after he hit a dog and scratched the car, said
Gono's fiancee, Muna Tarpeh. She claimed Taylor's son, Charles "Chucky" Taylor,
ordered the killing. The government blamed a junior commander in the elite
Anti-Terrorist Unit headed by the younger Taylor and promised to punish those
responsible. Gono was a lieutenant with the unit.

Gono died Wednesday evening after a severe beating. He was also made to squat
down and stand up again 500 times, Tarpeh said witnesses told her. The Defense
Ministry confirmed Friday that Gono was beaten in the younger Taylor's compound
but said Taylor was asleep elsewhere at the time.

Taylor's father, a former warlord, came to power in elections held after the
West African country's brutal 1989-96 civil war.

NETHERLANDS

General on trial has cancer, will be released

A Bosnian Serb general on trial on genocide charges will be released because he
has incurable cancer, the Yugoslav tribunal in The Hague said Friday.

Gen. Momir Talic will be allowed to return to Belgrade, but he was denied
permission to travel home to Banja Luka, or any other place in Bosnia covered by
his indictment.

He will be confined to his residence in Belgrade and the Military Medical
Academy, the only facility in the capital able to provide him with cancer
treatment, according to conditions ordered by the U.N. court.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2002

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                               17 of 17 DOCUMENTS

                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                       May 11, 2001 Friday Final Edition

Ghanaian soccer riot Africa's worst

SOURCE: New York Times

SECTION: World; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 189 words

DATELINE: Abidjan, Ivory Coast

The official tally released by Ghana's government Thursday -- at least 123
deaths and 93 injuries -- turned Wednesday night's stampede during a soccer
match into the worst sporting disaster in Africa's history and pushed to nearly
180 the number of spectators at sporting events killed across the continent in
the last month.

The deaths in a stadium in Accra, the capital of the West African nation,
followed similar incidents in Ivory Coast, Congo and South Africa.

In all cases, many have accused the police of having failed to control the
unruly crowds and, in at least two incidents, of having aggravated the stampedes
by firing excessive amounts of tear gas.

The disasters exposed once again how soccer's raw emotions are roused to fury in
many parts of the world, including Africa, a fact difficult to grasp in the
United States, where the sport has only begun to gain in popularity.

What is more, while soccer fatalities have occurred elsewhere, the past month's
deaths have also underscored the woeful unpreparedness of many African nations
to deal with security in stadiums, much less control rioting crowds.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News

               Copyright 2001 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved
