Workers strike to protest government salary plan that will not pay enough to afford basic survival.
African nationals expelled from Spain violently protest their detention conditions.
African nationals expelled from Spain peacefully protest their detention conditions and demand their return to Spain.
State employees riot and protest over unpaid salary and working conditions.
1998 Guinea-Bissau Government
Soldiers demonstrate outside army headquarters demanding promised pay.
Scattered riots due to election material not arriving at polling stations.
Soldiers protest over unpaid wages.
Ethnic clash between Mandinges and Balantes began when an animal got into a rice paddy.
Soldiers fight insurgents.
Soldiers attack suspected holding place of insurgents supporting Brig. Ansumane Mane.
Rival factions of the separatist Casamance movement of Senegal fight inside the border of Guinea-Bissau.  Rebel factions accuse Guinea- Bissau military of supporting rivals.
Teachers strike over unpaid wages.
Students march in support of teacher's strike over unpaid wages.
General strike in a bid to get higher wages.
Soldiers attack the army's headquarters due to grievances over promotions, administration and wages.
National Workers' Union launch strike to demand four months of back pay.
Judges strike to protest interference by Pres. Yala in judicial affairs.
Workers and civil rights group rally to protest Pres. Yala's treatment of the judiciary and non-democratic actions.
Opposition groups rally to demand Pres. Yala step down.
Teachers strike demanding past wages and higher salaries.
Civil servants strike thoughout the country to demand as much as 12 months worth of back pay.
State employees strike demanding back wages.
State employees strike demanding back wages.
Demonstrators show support for military coup, claiming the military is the sole protector of democracy.
Utility workers strike demanding past due salary of one year and bonuses.
Utility workers strike demanding past due salary of one year and bonuses.
Utility workers strike demanding past due salary of one year and bonuses.
Students strike over central government's indifference toward potential third year of closed schools due to teachers strikes.
Military troops opened fire on military headquarters demanding pay for serving in Liberia.
Teachers and health workers strike demanding back wages.
Supporters cheer the return of exiled former Pres. Vieira.
Supporters of former Pres. Yala demonstrate demanded his return as head of state.
Students and teachers demonstrate against former Pres. Yala's declaration that he was removed from office illegally and still remains the President
Protesters gather outside home of the president and headquarters of the Social Renewal Party to protest former Pres. Yala's occupation of the presidential home.
Former Pres. Yala supporters protest the outcome of the first round of the presidential election, in which Yala did not receive enough votes to be a contender in the second round.
Government and military buildings attacked by armed men.  Cause of attack remains unknown but is speculated to be related to election outcomes or the arrest of a former minister.
Supporters for both presidential candidates took to the streets after election results announced Vieira as the President elect.
Youths demonstrate against the dissolution of the government and appointment of a new prime minister.
Teachers strike demanding past wages and better living conditions.
Public workers strike demanding back wages and better working conditions.
Civil servants strike thoughout the country to demand as much as 12 months worth of back pay.
Nurses strike demanding promised bonuses and raises
Industrial workers strike demanding payment of owed salaries.
Government workers strike demanding 13 months of salary arrears.
Protesters demonstrate against the killing of Mohamed Lamine Sanha who was accused of plotting a coup.
Teachers strike over unpaid wages.
Presidential militia open fire on a car containing the chief of the military.  The cause is an ongoing political struggle arising from control of the cocaine trade.
A bomb explodes and kills the chief of the military.  The military retaliates the next day by killing the president.  The cause is an ongoing struggle between the chief of staff and the president over control of cocaine trade.
Soldiers beat up the former prime minister and a well known lawyer.
The government accuses several ministers and presidential candidates of fostering a coup.  The military cracks down, killing 4, including a presidential candidate.
Citizens demand the military release the Prime Minister.
Soldiers arrest the army chief and the Prime Minister in a coup.
A consumer group protests against the high cost of food.
Health workers strike to demand back pay from the government.
Seven opposition parties march to protest rising food prices and to demand that PM Carlos Gomes Junior resign, accusing him of failing to shed light of the 2009 assassination of president Joao Bernardo Vieira.
Seven opposition parties march to protest rising food prices and to demand that PM Carlos Gomes Junior resign, accusing him of failing to shed light of the 2009 assassination of president Joao Bernardo Vieira.
17 opposition parties march to protest rising food prices and to demand that PM Carlos Gomes Junior resign, accusing him of failing to shed light of the 2009 assassination of president Joao Bernardo Vieira.
Health workers strike to demand back pay from the government.
Taxi drivers strike to protest police extortion and the level of bureaucracy imposed by authorities.
Soldiers mutiny and attempt a coup to demand a pay increase.
Youth Activists staged a protest outside the National Elections Commission building, demanding names be added to the presidential candidates list.  Police attempting to break up the protest accidentally fired tear gas on military personel also at the scene, leading to the army attacking police, beating and arresting four police officers.
Men in military uniforms shot and killed ex-military intelligence deputy chief Colonel Samba Diallo.  Diallo was alledgedly involved in 2009 bombing that killed the country's then army chief.  The military has denied any involvement in the assassination.
The military attacked the headquarters of the ruling party as well as the home of outgoing PM and presidential cadidate Carlos Gomes Jr.  The military then sealed off the capital's downtown area and captured both the PM and interim president as well as other politicians.  The army claimed it acted to protest alledged secret military deals with Angola.
Soldiers violently disbanded a group of 30 protesters attempting to hold a peaceful demonstration outside the national assembly building.
Guinea-Bissau's main labor union, consisting mostly of public sector workers, called a general strike to protest the April military coup.
Gunmen lead by Captain Pansau N'Tchama attacked an army barracks early in the morning.  Soldiers repelled the assault, killing at least six attackers.  One army sentry was also believed to have been killed, but the military refused to confirm red beret casualties.
Three Nigerians accused of kidnapping a child were lynched to death by a mob of several hundred armed with stones and bottles and police fired tear gas and shots in the air
During presidential election, soldiers nearly beat to death lawmaker from PAIGC party
Military coup against president over wages paid for peacekeeping effort in Liberia.
Failed military coup against ruling junta.
Students protest against police abuse, leading to riots.
Students protest against police abuse, leading to riots.
Supporters of rival parties clash in the streets, one killed by soldiers
Lawyers boycott courts after firing of a justice
Riot in Senegal after football match, Gambians riot against Senegalese in their country
Opposition leader arrested after calling for protests over prices
Lawyers protest over government meddling in judicial affairs
Radio and newspapers issue a blackout after government imposes a registration requirement
Liberians in Gambia protest the UN arrest of a spiritual leader
Protests over killing of a man accused of drug dealing by police
The Gambia Press Union and opposition party the Gambia Moral Congress, protested the shutting down of Terenga FM, a community radio station, by the National Intelligence Agency.
A Gambian journalist who contributes to The Associated Press was arrested and his house was searched and released 3 days later
Baboucarr Ceesay, vice president of the Gambia Press Union, was arrested
Soldiers attempt to overthrow president Yahya Jammeh in a coup
After a failed coup attempt on 30-Jan-14, members of the security forces marched from the National Assembly to the Presidential Palace in support of president Jammeh. 
Activists were protesting sand mining projects. 
1990 Mali Government
Soldiers fire on citizens during violent anti-government riots
Police open fire on women protesting police brutality, chase them into a building and set it on fire.
Malian workers strike demanding president's resignation
Touareg rebels attack local offices and villagers
Touareg rebels claim to have killed 65 Malian soldiers and captured 10 more
Touareg rebels attack and raid a village
Touareg rebels attack Timbuktu to disrupt peace talks
Tuareg workers march in a call for peace and end to racism
Touareg rebels attack and raid the town, including a maternity unit, injuring 2 infants
Rebels attack a village in search of supplies and are pursued by police
Rebels attack a caravan of tourists, stealing money, 4 cars and attempting to rape a woman
Citizens riot outside trial proceedings of ousted president
Students riot  alleging establishment of bogus congress and demanding larger student grants
Police disperse students protesting qualifications for study grants
1994 Mali Government
Rebels attack villagers, stealing money, supplies and vehicles
Rebels attack and rob French tourists, seriously injuring a young girl
Police disperse banned demonstration by political opposition
Citizens protest leading up to elections and are repeatedly dispersed by police using tear gas
Workers strike demanding resignation of union head official
Citizens engage in banned demonstration protesting election results
Citizens riot and boycott elections alleged to be rigged
Police officer attacked and lynched by leaders of opposition party
Ethnic groups clash over cattle thefts, killing 15
Students riot demanding more education funding
Rebels attack race participants and steal cars
Malian workers strike demanding price cuts and career plans
Ethnic groups clash over division of territory and resources
Rebels attack an ambulance carrying soldiers and captured rebels
Dutch tourists are robbed and killed by rebels
Malian teachers protest for higher wages
Rebels attack and rob ten European tourists
Citizens protest meetings of World Bank and IMF
Ethnic groups clash over land disputes
Rebels attack and rob two separate convoys in the same region
Announced relocation of municipal office incites riot, killing eight.
Dogon youths attack homes of rival chiefs, killing 7
Muslim ethnic groups clash over construction of a mosque
Workers strike demanding the raise of minimum wages
Disabled Malians strike, demanding better protection from government
Football fans riot in Bamoko after referee's call
Malian cotton workers protest loss of 2000 jobs due to privatisation
Malian journalists protest beating and arrest of well-known journalist
Malian Muslims protest publication of Mohammed cartoon
Malians expelled from France protest Sarkozy's visit
Tuareg rebels temporarily take over military bases, killing six
Fuel workers strike demanding a raise in wages
Football fans riot in Bamoko after referee's call
Malian journalists protest arrests of five journalists
Malian journalists strike protesting limits on press freedom
Malian workers strike demanding better working conditions and higher wages
2007 Mali Government
Malian students strike demanding better class conditions
Citizens protest planned decision to privatise drining water
Citizens protest negotiations of immigration acord with France
Al-Qaeda kidnaps British man and demands Al-Qaeda official held in Britain be released or he will be killed
Troops attack Al-Qaeda cell suspected of killing British citizen
Al-Qaeda attacks Malian military convoy, killing 28 soldiers
Citizens riot after a man who refused to stop at a police checkpoint was stopped
Muslims hold protest against newly introduced laws that strengthen the rights of women
Al-Qaeda kidnaps an aid worker
Minibus drivers strikeand attack police symbols after one is killed in an altercation with police.
Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb attacks Belgian aid workers, kidnaps them and abandons them in the desert.
Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb attacks a truck filled with citizens, killing one and stealing valuables.
Mauritanian troops pursue Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb into Mali.
Mauritanian troops pursue Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb into Mali.
A Timbuktu tribe attacks members of Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, allegedly in retaliation for previous attacks.
Supporters of Ivory Coast's elected president overtake the embassy in an attempt to enforce a strike called by Ouattara.
A man claiming to be a member fo Al-Qaeda hurls a homemade bomb and fires several gunshots at the French embassy.
Pupils hold a demonstration to denounce the fact that the road to their school is dangerous.  Police violently break up the demonstration.
Mali's army fights off an  attack by about 100 armed men.
Thousands of people march to protest the Western-led intervention in Libya.
A mine explodes, killing 3 civilians during a joint military sweep against al-Qaeda.
A soldier is killed in the latest in a string of incidents blamed on Tuareg fighters returning from the war in Libya.
Gunmen abduct two French tourists from a hotel.
An armed gang kidnaps three foreign tourists and kills a fourth.
Al Qaeda militants attack a newly built military barracks.
2012 Mali Government
2012 Mali Government
Protesters surrounded the presidential palace, protesting the governments handling of the attacks by Tuareg rebels.  Protesters also blocked streets and burned tires, and retaliatory attacks against Tuareg property in the city were reported
Soldiers families gathered to protest the government's handling of the Tuareg rebels. Protesters also attacked the home and business of a Tuareg family.
Protests against the governments handling of the Tuareg rebellions took place in southern cities Segou and Sikasso.
Protests against the governments handling of the Tuareg rebellions took place in southern cities Segou and Sikasso.
Security forces dispersed an attempted protest against the arrest of two female rebel supporters.
Mutinous soldiers surrounded and began firing on the presidential palace in Bamako after seizing the Malian Radio-Television Office.  The soldiers claimed to be dissatisfied with Government handling of the Tuareg rebels and demanded new weapons with which to fight them.  They also began protesting in military bases in Kati and Gao.  The president was forced to flea.
Mutinous soldiers surrounded and began firing on the presidential palace in Bamako after seizing the Malian Radio-Television Office.  The soldiers claimed to be dissatisfied with Government handling of the Tuareg rebels and demanded new weapons with which to fight them.  They also began protesting in military bases in Kati and Gao.  The president was forced to flea.
Mutinous soldiers surrounded and began firing on the presidential palace in Bamako after seizing the Malian Radio-Television Office.  The soldiers claimed to be dissatisfied with Government handling of the Tuareg rebels and demanded new weapons with which to fight them.  They also began protesting in military bases in Kati and Gao.  The president was forced to flea.
14 ministers under custody of the military junta began a hunger strike to protest their detention.
About 1000 protesters from political parties and organizations, forming the FUDR staged a protest outside the stock exchange, demonstrating against the junta.  They called for a return of constitutional order.
Thousands of protesters organized by Mali's only opposition party in Parliament demonstrated in support of the Junta.  Their banners denounced President Toure, France, and the international community.  Protesters also turned away a plane carrying 5 West African heads of state by swarming the airport runway.
25,000 Christian and Muslim demonstrators gathered at the stadium in Bamako to stage a peace rally.
Political parties supporting the coup bussed in several hundred people to stage a pro-junta rally in a statdium in Bamako.
A protest was held in Northern Mali
A Swiss woman was kidnapped in Timbuktu by an Islamist group.
Soldiers loyal to the pre-junta government staged a countercoup in Bamako, first attempting to take the airport to fly in reinforcements.  Much of the fighting centered around the garrison at Kati, near Bamako.  The countercoup was defeated.
Soldiers loyal to the pre-junta government staged a countercoup in Bamako, first attempting to take the airport to fly in reinforcements.  Much of the fighting centered around the garrison at Kati, near Bamako.  The countercoup was defeated.
Students staged a protest after rumors circulated saying forces close to the junta had killed a student leader.  A spokesman denied the student had been killed.
Islamists, who have occupied Timbuktu since April, attacked an desecrated the tomb of Sidi Mahmoud Ben Amar, which is classified as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. This has threatened to inflame tensions between the Islamists and residents of the city.
Residents of occupied Goa staged a protest against the Rebel and Islamists forces holding the city.  Five protesters were wounded.
Thousands of Malians staged a protest against the deal brokered between the junta, Diancounda Traore, and ECOWAS, claiming that it had not involved the Malian people. Protesters also broke into Traore's office and attacked him.  He was later taken, unconscious to a hospital.
Members of Ansar Dine destroyed a monument to those who died in the 1991 struggle against dictator Moussa Traore.
Residents of northern towns staged protests against the Islamist Ansar Dine and in support of the Secular MNLA.
Protesters gathered to demonstrate against the killing of municipal leader Idrissa Oumarou by an insurgent.  MNLA openned fire on the protesters, killing one and wounding several others.  The Islamists MUJAO took the opportunity to invade and seize the city.
Islamists attacked and destroyed three historic tombs of Muslim saints as well as a historic mosque.  The tombs are considered by UNESCO to be World Heritage Sites
Around 2000 protesters from Northern Mali staged a sit-in protest in Bamako against the Islamists who have taken over the north of the country.  Inparticular, th edemonstrated against Ansar Dine's destruction of sites in Timbuktu and the laying of landmines around Gao.
Between 250 and 500 Pro-coup demonstrators protested in Bamako against the ECOWAS meeting called to discuss solutions to the crisis in Mali.
Approximately 90 residents of Goundam staged a protest against occupying Islamists forces after Ansar Dine members whipped a woman carrying her baby for not wearing an adequate veil, injuring the child.  Islamists then went from house to house whipping the protesters.
Over 300 military wives marched in Bamako demanding to know the wereabouts of the soldiers who were arrested or disappeared after the March 22 coup.
Over 500 journalists marched in Bamako and went on a one day strike, protesting attacks on journalists by armed men believed to be linked to the junta that took power March 22.
Hundreds of protesters gathered to prevent Islamists from amputating a young man's hand as penalty for stealing.
Civil Society group Yere Wolo Ton organized a protest outside the presidential palace calling for President Traore's resignation.  The demonstration was broken up by police firing teargas.
Around 50,000 people marched in Bamako, calling for the formation of a transitional unity government.
Citizens of Niafounke demonstrated against occupying Islamists after one a fight between an Ansar Dine member and black fishing vessel passenger.  Islamists fired into the air to disperse the crowd and one woman was shot and wounded.
Security forces executed 16 moderate Muslim preachers that were on their way to a conference in Bamako.  7 were Malian and 9 were from Mauritania.  Security forces claimed the mistook the preachers for extremists.
Around 200 protesters marched in Timbuktu, demonstrating against the killing of 16 moderate Muslim preachers by Malian security forces.
Islamists destroyed the mausoleum of Cheik El-Kebir, located 33 kilometers north of Gao.
11 Islamists destoyed the tomb of Alfa Mobo, a Muslim saint, in Goundam.
200 Women marched in Timbuktu against requirements that they wear the veil.  Islamist forces fired into the air to disperse them.
Around 10,000 of protesters marched in Bamako in support of the Malian army and calling for a West African force to intervene and retake Mali's north from occupying Islamist forces.
Members of Ansar Dine continued to attack and destroy historic Islamic tombs, this time destroying three in the neighborhood of Kabara.
Around 2000 protesters marched against foreign military intervention in Mali's occupied north.  They also carried signs denouncing interim President Dioncounda Traore.
400 police officers staged a protest calling for better working conditions after four of their colleagues were abducted.
Several thousand protesters, organized by Muslim leaders, gather to demonstrate against Islamic extemism.
Around 1000 protesters organized by political parties marched in Bamako demanding international intervention in Northern Mali.
Two military officers arrested Prime Minister Cheikh Modibo Diarra and brought him to the Kati military base.  He was then replaced by Diango Cissoko.  This was done on the orders of Capt. Amadou Haya Sanogo, leader of the March 21 coup.
Malian Government Fires warning shots at Islamists as they advance towards Kona
Malian government forces clash with islamists
Malian forces, with French assistance, attempted to retake Kona
French Air Force bombed northern Mali to push out Islamist Militants
Islamists push south to strike back against the Malian government after French air strikes
French air force bombed Malian town to displace Islamists
French Air force strike southern town that was taken by Islamist militants
French and Malian ground troops are taking steps to retake towns held by Islamists
French and Malian ground troops are taking steps to retake towns held by Islamists
French and Malian ground troops displace Islamist Militants
French and Malian forces push out Islamist Militants in Diably
French air force bombs northern Mali towns
French Air force bombed militant positions in Gao
French air force bombs northern Mali towns
Islamists militants destroy bridge near Niger
French and Malian troops push out Islamist Militants
French and Malian troops route Islamist Militants in Timbuktu
Malian looters destroyed Arab owned stores as French move out of Timbuktu
French Air Force bomb Islamist militant positions in Kidal
French air force bombs militant strong holds
French air force bombs militant strong holds
French air force bombs Islamist Supply routes
Islamists attack French forces in Gao
Landmines killed four in Mali
Landmines killed four in Mali
Suicide Bomber in Gao
Troops refused to be sent to the front to fight Islamist militants
Malian troops engage Islamist militants following a suicide bombing
Islamist militants attacked Gao
Islamist launch second suicide bomb
Islamist kill French soldier
Militants attacked Malian government
Militants attacked Malian government
Militants fired rockets at Milian government forces
Car bombs kill five
MAA fighters sought to displace Arab rebels from In-Khalil
Chad and French soldiers engaged Islamic Militants
Islamist launch a car bomb in Kidal
Islamist militants killed four civilians
French forces engaged Islamic militants
Suicide Bomb and troop clashes in Timbuktu
Tuareg rebels ambush Malian government
Islamists kill seven in assault in Gao
Malian and French forces battle Islamists after they were attacked in Timbuktu
Suicide Bomb kills three in Kidal
Suicide Bomb in Gao target Malian government
Multiple suicide attacks across Mali
Multiple suicide attacks across Mali
Tuareg rebels expelled black residents of Kidal
Suicide bomber attacked Tuareg Rebel Leader's house in Kidal
Police arrest potential protesters of a deal withTuareg rebels
Tuareg killed two civilians
Tuareg rebels attacked government supporters in the lead up to elections in Kidal
Tuareg man killed by mob on his way home to vote
Malian soldiers suffered a loss after a grenade was thrown at them in Kidal
Suicide bombers attacked government barracks
Tuareg rebels attacked government forces in Kidal
Suicide bomber blew himself up in Kidal
Disgruntled Soldiers kidnapped their commander
Tuareg rebels attacked Malian forces in Kidal
Islamic militants shelled government forces in Gao
Islamic militants bombed bridges on Niger border
Islamic suicide bomber killed three
Islamic militants shelled government forces in Gao
Gao residents rioted over the make up of a delegation representing them in peace talks
Landmine kills four on the road from Ansongo
Government forces kill three Tuareg rebels
Tuareg protesters burned down government buildings in protest of army occupation
French soldiers were wounded by landmine
Militants fired rockets at Milian government forces
Tuareg militants prevented elections from taking place in Kidal
Kidal Residents protested election results
Suicide bomber attacks Malian and French forces
French forces engaged Islamic militants
Suicide bombs kill Peacekeepers
Soldiers on a hunger strike over unjust imprisonment are released
Three peacekeepers are wounded after exchanging fire with attackers who earlier targeted a military camp with rockets.
Peacekeepers are wounded when their vehicle hits a landmine.
French forces carry out operations against terrorist groups.
French forces carry out operations against terrorist groups.
The town of kidal is hit by two rockets.
Two rockets are fired at a French army base.
Members of the Peul community murder Tuareg merchants returning from a market.
An al-Qaeda affiliate claims to kidnap aid workers.
MUJAO militants fire rockets at the town.
Unidentified terrorists fire rockets at the town.
AQIM fighters are killed during a counter-terrorism operation by French forces.
French forces kill a jihadi spokesman in a shootout with militants.
A coup leader goes on a hunger strike to protest his transfer to a southern prison.
Residents demonstrate over rumors that people suspected of being infected with Ebola are being held in isolation in their neighborhood.
A former president's house is attacked
Militants fire rockets at a school and french army base, missing their targets.
An IED is remotely detonated near a peacekeepers' camp.
Militants fire a rocket into the center of Gao.
A UN peacekeeper is wounded when his vehicle hits an IED.
A man who foiled an attempted bombing is assassinated.
UN peacekeepers are wounded when their vehicle hits a landmine.
People protest the prime minister's tour through a separatist region
Tuareg rebels clash with the army during a visit by the prime minister outside the regional governor's headquarters.
Protesters demonstrate against MINUSMA peacekeepers and call for the liberation of Kidal.
Protesters demonstrate against Tuareg violence and then attack businesses.
Protesters gather at the French Embassy who is seen as enabling the MNLA to regain power in Kidal.
The Malian army attacks Tuareg rebels who retaliate and take control of Kidal and Menaka.
The Malian army attacks Tuareg rebels who retaliate and take control of Kidal and Menaka.
Two Malians are killed when their vehicle hits a landmine.
A military officer who opposed a coup two years ago is kidnapped.
A suicide bomber kills four Chadian peacekeepers.
A peacekeeper is killed by a landmine.
Clashes break out between the MNLA and militiamen they accuse of being supported by the Malian army.
A suicide bomber kills a French legionnaire.
Three peacekeepers are wounded in different land mine explosions.
A suicide bomber kills two peacekeepers from Burkina Faso.
Islamist militants fire rockets at a UN peacekeepers' base.
Four Chadian peacekeepers are killed when their vehicle hits a landmine.
Jihadists are blamed for a land mine that kills a Chadian peacekeeper.
An ethnic Tuareg is beheaded, accused of informing international forces. His family is kidnapped.
A land mine kills five peacekeepers from Chad.
A land mine kills two civilians.
Terrorists ambush a convoy of Nigerian peacekeepers.
A jihadist launches rockets at a MINUSMA camp, killing a Senegalese peacekeeper.
A French soldier is killed during a counterterrorism operation.
Two Malian soldiers are killed by an explosive device.
A militant is killed during clashes with separatists.
A suicide bomber dies in an attempted bombing.
Two soldiers are killed by a landmine.
French and Malian forces conduct a counterterrorism operation, killing a top commander.
Three Chadian peacekeepers are wounded by a roadside bomb.
A UN truck rolled over an explosive device east of Gao, injuring six, on the same day that gunmen forced UN soldiers out of four trucks north of Gao and torched the vehicles.
A UN truck rolled over an explosive device east of Gao, injuring six, on the same day that gunmen forced UN soldiers out of four trucks north of Gao and torched the vehicles.
AQIM attacked the town of Nampala, home of an army base, leading to a five-hour firefight; some soldiers fled, but the military regained control of the town later in the day.
Gunmen entered Djoura, fired shots, and set fire to a town hall; they shot and killed one civilian as they left towards the Mauritanian border.
A UN vehicle was hit by an explosion near the airport in Kidal, injuring 7 peacekeepers.
Thousands demonstrated in Bamako to protest satirical images of the Prophet Mohammed printed in France's Charlie Hebdo magazine.
Jihadist fighters clashed with the Malian military in Tenenkou; at least two soldiers were killed.
A MINUSMA peacekeeping base was attacked by gunmen, who killed one Chadian soldier and set off an explosion near the base's entrance.
After coming under ground fire from NMLA fighters, a UN helicopter shot an NMLA vehicle, killing 7.
In protest of the killing of Tuareg fighters by UN troops the previous day in Tabankort, Tuareg protesters burned generators and knocked over tents at the airfield in Kidal, pushing UN peacekeepers back to their camp.
Malian troops were ambushed by gunmen on their way to Douekire; two were killed and three were injured.
Around 2000 people, mostly youths, protested outside the UN base in Gao in opposition of a plan to create a UN-controlled buffer zone in the area; protesters threw stones and Molotov cocktails and UN troops fired tear gas. Following an investigation, it was confirmed that UN troops fired into the crowd, killing 3.
Pro-government GATIA fighters, including suicide bombers, attacked rebel forces near Tabankort, killing around 12 people.
French troops attacked rebel fighters in the Adrar des Ifoghas region, killing 12.
Military police repelled an attack by unknown terrorists in Dogofiry.
A military truck rolled over a land mine near the village of Didi outside Timbuktu.
Pro-government fighters and rebel fighters exchanged fire in Tabricha.
An explosion injured seven UN troops in Tabankort; it was not confirmed whether the explosion was an attack or an accident.
Hundreds protested in Kidal following the announcement of a peace accord signed by the central government and some regional armed groups; the CMA announced it was not yet ready to sign the accord.
At least one gunman entered the Terasse nightclub in Bamako and opened fire and threw grenades, killing 5 people and wounding 8; the attack was later claimed by Al-Mourabitoun.
A mob in Gao lynched and burned 2 teenage boys suspected of planting bombs; it was later found that they were innocent.
More than 30 rockets and shells hit the UN base in Kidal, killing 1 peacekeeper and 2 civilians, both children.
Gunmen opened fire on an International Red Cross truck on its way from Gao to Niamey to pick up hospital supplies, killing 1 Red Cross worker and injuring another.
A bomb exploded accidentally in a house in Bamako, killing one security guard and injuring four; upon investigation, police discovered an apparent terrorist plot and arrested one person.
Gunmen on motorcycles fired on the police station and town hall in the village of Boni, killing 2.
Militants fired three rockets on the city of Gao, hitting a private residence and city center and killing 1.
French special forces carried out a strike against AQIM in northern Mali, freeing a Dutch citizen who had been kidnapped by the group more than three years prior. 
A Malian army truck hit a roadside bomb in the Segou region between Niono and Diabaly, killing two soldiers.
A member of Al-Murabitoun attempted to drive into the UN base in Asongo and detonated explosions at the entrance, killing himself and two civilians and injuring 21. 
Gunmen killed two drivers in a UN convoy, then set fire to the trucks.
A UN convoy was ambushed by gunmen 30 km west of Gao, and one civilian driver was killed.
7 UN peacekeepers were wounded in an attack southwest of Kidal.
Pro-government GATIA fighters took over parts of Menaka that had previously been occupied by CMA fighters; clashes continued the next day about 14 km outside of Menaka.
Pro-government GATIA fighters took over parts of Menaka that had previously been occupied by CMA fighters; clashes continued the next day about 14 km outside of Menaka.
Separatist fighters opened fire on UN troops outside of Timbuktu.
The CMA ambushed Malian troops in Lere, leading to a battle in which 10 CMA fighters and 9 Malian soldiers were killed.
Gumen in three cars entered Goundam and killed the head of the national guard, his deputy, and a girl.
A bus headed to a market 25 km outside of Gao hit a land mine, killing 3 passengers.
CMA fighters attacked and looted the town of Bintagoungou, killing one civilian and taking 6 hostages.
Thousands of people marched in Bamako to call to an end to fighting in the north.
The CMA ambushed the town of Dire.
Jihadists partially destroyed a mausoleum in Hamdallahi that had been declared a UN World Heritage Site, leaving a note warning that they'd attack those who did not follow the teachings of the prophet.
CMA fighters attacked Tenenkou, leading to a battle that killed 10 CMA fighters and 1 Malian soldier.
CMA fighters ambushed an army convoy near Tin Telout, killing 9 Malian soldiers and wounding 14 others.
Separatist fighters and pro-government militia fought in the village of Ikadewan, killing 4.
French special forces killed four jihadists in a raid in northern Mali, including Amada Ag Hama, a leader of AQIM, and Ibrahim Ag Inawalen, a leader of Ansar Dine.
CMA fighters attacked Malian troops as they slept, killing 3 soldiers.
A militant opened fire on a UN residence in Bamako, wounding a guard; he also left two unexploded grenades at the scene.
CMA fighters attacked GATIA militia in Tin Hama; after the fighting, civilians thought to be associated with the CMA were killed by pro-government fighters.
CMA fighters announced that they had captured 19 Malian soldiers in fighting in Tessit; the Malian army did not confirm this number.
Gunmen attacked a UN vehicle near the Bamako airport, killing one peackeeper and wounding another.
Thousands of demonstrators marched in Bamako to support the government and express support for the peace agreement.
A UN convoy hit a land mine between the towns of Dire and Bar, wounding 3 peacekeepers; AQIM later claimed responsibility for the attack.
A rocket was fired into a wall at a MINUSMA base in Gao but caused no casualties; AQIM claimed the attack a few days later.
A haulier was kidnapped by an unknown group in the Gao region and his body was found two days later.
A civilian was killed after being fired on from a car.
A civilian was killed by gunmen.
Jihadists attacked a military base in the town of Misseni, killing a policeman.
Ansar Dine fighters attacked Malian soldiers in the town of Nara; 3 soliders and 9 Ansar Dine fighters were killed.
Ansar Dine fighters ransaked the town of Fakola, burning public buildings and the police station before being driven out by security forces.
Malian soldiers killed 3 terrorists in a search operation in the Sama forest near Fakola.
AQIM ambushed a UN patrol on the road to Goundam, killing 6 peacekeepers, wounding 5, and destroying two vehicles.
French special forces killed Ali Ag Wadossene, a leader of AQIM, and captured 2 others in an operation in the Kidal region.
Malian troops conducted two offensives in the Sikasso region to capture insurgents, including Ansar Diner fighters; the military reported that several jihadists were killed.
An army convoy was ambushed by fighters on the road between Nampala and Diabaly; 2 soldiers were killed and 5 were injured.
AQIM fighters on motorcycles attacked a security post of the Mali National Guard in Gourma-Rharouss and killed 11 soldiers.
FLM fighters attempted to attack a Sevare army base and Hotel Debo before entering the hotel Byblos, opening fire, and taking hostages; the resulting fighting and overnight  standoff killed 4 attackers, 4 soldiers, 4 UN workers, and a Malian driver.
Tuareg separatists attacked the village of Gaberi and killed 10 people; a source said it was retaliation in response to the beheading of a separatist by a pro-government group.
A military vehicle hit an IED near Diabozo, killing 3 soldiers.
Two gunmen opened fire on a police post at a busy bus station in Bamako, wounding a policeman and a civilian.
Two gunmen killed Aladji Sekou, an imam in the village of Barkerou who had refused jihadist attempts to recruit him.
Three days of fighting took place in the Kidal region between GATIA and the CMA; 23 CMA fighters were killed and GATIA took over the village of Anefis.
Three days of fighting took place in the Kidal region between GATIA and the CMA; 23 CMA fighters were killed and GATIA took over the village of Anefis.
Armed Tuareg nomads attacked a Songhai camp in northern Mali, provoking a counterattack the following day; theft and intercommuncal conflict motivated the attacks.
A vehicle in a UN convoy hit a land mine on a road 70 km east of Ansongo, and two UN peacekeepers were seriously injured.
Gunmen with automatic weapons attacked an army checkpoint outside Timbuktu; 2 soldiers were killed, 1 was injured, and 1 went missing.
Members of the Macina Liberation Front attacked a police post in Ouenkoro and killed an officer, after which they set fire to two vehicles and the residence of a local government official.
Officials in the Kidal region announced that fighting had resumed between Tuareg separatists and a pro-government militia; a spokesman for the alliance of Tuareg groups confirmed this and stated that the fighting was in self-defense after pro-government militia fighters moved on their positions.
Gunmen opened fire on the police station in Bih, killing two policemen and two civilians.
Tuareg separatists attacked a village in the Gao region, targeting the families of Tuaregs thought to be aligned with the government.
Jihadists entered the village of Dounapen brandishing black flags and killed 3 civilians, including a mayoral assistant.
Three members of the French special forces were injured in a landmine explosion in northern Mali.
A civilian convoy being escorted by security forces hit a roadside bomb west of Gao and was then attacked by jihadists, killing 6 civilians and wounding 1 civilian and one soldier; MINUSMA lorries came to assist and were set on fire by the jhadists.
The Malian army killed 7 jihadist fighters and injured 10 in fighting in the Tiebana forest, as the start of what officials said would be a three-month offensive. 
Gunmen stormed the Radisson Blu hotel in Bamako, opening fire and taking over 100 people hostage; 20 people died.
A UN convoy was hit with explosives on the road between Goundam and Timbuktu, killing 1 civilian staff member.
Ansar Dine claimed a rocket attack on the UN base in Kidal that killed 2 peacekeepers and a UN contractor.
Four gunmen shot out the tyres of a truck carrying migrants on the road to Kidal, and then killed 4 passengers and wounded 6.
AQIM gunmen attacked a military checkpoint in Nione; one Malian soldier was wounded and two were reported missing.
Islamists launched at least 4 shells at the UN barracks in Gao, but no casualties or damage was inflicted.
A gunman killed three people outside a Christian radio station in Timbuktu, including a radio presenter.
French forces engaged in fighting with AQIM in the Menaka region, killing or capturing 10 fighters and seizing vehicles and arms; the MAA claimed that 4 of its fighters had also been killed by the French in friendly fire, but a French source denied this.
Ansar Dine carried out two attacks in the Kidal region, killing at least 4 CMA fighters in one attack and 11 Tuareg fighters in another attack.
1990 Senegal Government
Two government officials are killed by separatist militants.
1992 Senegal Government
Citizens strike to protest paycuts for civil servants
Guinean citizens attack embassy in Dakar, protesting elections
An Islamic group riots and kills 6 police officers in protest of devaluation of currency and protest ban
1995 Senegal Government
1997 Senegal Government
Citizens riot and kill 8 immigrants, claiming they used foreign magic to shrink their genitals
Citizens riot and kill 8 immigrants, claiming they used foreign magic to shrink their genitals
Air traffic controllers strike, demanding higher wages
Electric workers strike to protest privatization and demand higher wages
Rebels kill 2 civilians, then lose 20 in subsequent battle with police
Rebels attack multiple villages, killing two civilians
Citizens strike protesting collapse of negotations over wages and welfare
Rebels attack a bus, killing 2 civilians
Mouride Muslims attack mosques of rival sect
Opposing rebel factions fight over recently elected military chief
Rebels attack civilians, killing one
Senegalese citizens attack Nigerian embassy and businesses after Nigerian soccer team defeats Senegal
Unidentified citizens drive three cars through crowds of Democratic Party rally, killing 4
Supporters of opposing political parties clash, fighting and torching houses
Citizens riot during runoff election
2000 Senegal Government
Villagers block border crossings between Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, protesting gang violence in Guinea-Bissau
Villagers block border crossings between Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, protesting gang violence in Guinea-Bissau
Students strike and riot, protesting high student expenses
Workers protest announced decision to lay off 50% of staff
Senegalese women march in protest of marital violence
Senegalese Muslims protest U.S. air strikes on Afghanistan
Citizens protest threat to remove immunity of ex-prime minister
Peacekeeping soldiers protest and block roads, demanding wages
Rebel soldiers attack citizens, looting shops
Separatist rebels attack a village, making off with goods and money.
Separatist rebels attack a village and telecentre.
Separatist rebels attack a village, opening fire and stealing thousands of dollars worth of money and goods.
Rebels attack citizens, killing 7
Rebel soldiers attack village, killing 6
Senegalese soldiers capture and kill MFDC rebels in raid
Transportation workers block roads and ferry, protesingt inconsistent fare increases
Casamance rebels attack villagers.
Former MFDC separatist rebels attack and kill five civilians in the region.
Oil workers strike, protesting lack of demands met
Citizens protest government handling of probe into ferry accident
Gabonese students invade Gabon Embassy and take 3 hostages, demanding unpaid stipends
2003 Senegal Government
protesters march, urging other African nations to vote against potential war in Iraq
Senegalese Muslims protest possible war in Iraq
Students demonstrate, and some throw stones at U.S. Embassy, protesting invasion of Iraq
Students demonstrate, and some throw stones at U.S. Embassy, protesting invasion of Iraq
Senegalese and Gambian soccer fans engage in fighting after Senegalese win
Citizens protest visit of President Bush and invasion of Iraq
Secessionist rebels end several months of peace by attacking Senegalese soldiers.
Media workers strike, protesting detention of journalists
Journalists protest detainment of editor
Citizens riot against newly planned business park because it includes plans to replace sports stadium
MFDC members break into two factions and clash repeatedly.
Transportation workers strike, protesting new traffic codes and police harassment of bus drivers
Citizens protest, demanding more transparent elections and end to government monopoly on media
Citizens attack Solidarity Minister on routine visit
Separatist rebels attack a military convoy.
Supporters of ousted Prime Minister march, protesting his summons about a land project
Health workers strike, demanding better working and living conditions
Senegalese truckers create a blockade into Gambia surrounding almost the entire country, protesting raise in ferry prices
Students strike and clash with police over computers not delivered
Rival factions clash during arguments about repeated violence.
Lebanese immigrants protest, demanding a halt to Israeli attacks on Lebanon
Rebels attack a bus, seriously injuring 6
Rebels attack an army convoy, killing 2 and injuring several.
Disabled ex-soldiers launch hunger strike after a demonstration ended in clashes with police
Crowd protests postponement of general elections
Supporters of rival presidential candidates clash, seriously injuring 5
Air Senegal employees strike, demanding higher wages and additional workers
Rival factions clash over control of territory in the region.
After funeral of boy who died in police custody, mourners clash with police, killing 1
Rival factions clash in southern Casamance region, near Gambian border
Transport unions march, despite cancellation of permit, leading to clashes with police
Street vendors, protesting attempt to clear them from certain areas, clash with police
MFDC rebels kill the presidential peace envoy to the Casamance region in his home.
Demonstration against high prices is violently broken up by police
Teachers strike, demanding an increase in lodging allowance
Rebel soldiers kidnap 20 men and cut their ears off as a warning to not harvest some of their crops
Soldiers clash with rebels after soldiers attempt to destroy a hemp field.
Rebels attack cashew harvesters, killing one
Workers strike, protesting soaring food prices
News media hold 'blackout' day after alleged assault on 2 journalists by police
MFDC rebels attack dozens of vehicles, killing one and robbing dozens.
Groups of armed men attack newspaper offices, threatening employees and destroying equipment
Citizens protest recent crackdown on state media
Citizens protest poor living conditions, leading to clashes with police that killed 2
Citizens protest destruction of old stadium to build new shopping and office centres
Chinese traders strike after one of their own was murdered in an effort to draw attention to their lack of security
Religious protesters clash with police after sentences handed out for conducting female circumcision
Rebels attack Senegalese civilians in two separate attacks.
Rebels attack civilians to take the supplies they carried
Military bombs ex-rebel bases
Rebels attack soldiers on patrol
Rebels attack a local village and clash with the army after soldiers intervene.
Rebels kill soldier on patrol in a small village
Christians attack police outside a cathedral after archbshop claims President insulted Christianity
Rebels kill a former government soldier thought to be an army informer in Bouraraye Bainouk.
Rebels attack several villages, forcing refugees to flee from the area.
Rebels attack several villages, forcing refugees to flee from the area.
Rebels attack several villages, forcing refugees to flee from the area.
Rebels kill two soldiers.
Rebels attack an army position.
Soccer fans furious that their team will not play in Senegal's second division riot, torching and ransacking buildings, prompting police to fire rubber bullets.  Youths attack the town hall and set fire to a municipal hotel complex.
Fighting erupts throughout Casamance province between rebels and the army.
statue, calling it sexist, immodest, and too expensive.  The police briefly detain protest organizers.
Several women's organizations organize about 50 protesters against an Israeli raid on an aid flotilla headed for the Gaza strip.
Due to frequent electricity outages during a time of high temperatures and humidity, angry crowds take to the streets; burning tires, blocking streets and clashing with police.  Police beat one man to death.
Rioting breaks out after a university disciplinary council expells three students.
Senegal's post and telecom union stages a one day strike to protest the entry of the American Global Voice Group into the local market.
Opposition protesters take to the streets to protest power cuts, floods, rising food costs, as well as scandals, incompetence, and corruption in the government.
Bakers strike to press the state to raise the price of bread after a steep increase in the price of flour.
Protesters demonstrate, burn tires, block roads, throw rocks at police to protest against ongoing power cuts.
Protesters demonstrate, burn tires, block roads, throw rocks at police to protest against ongoing power cuts.
Clashes erupt between government and rebel forces.
Police halt a demonstration against the squandering of public funds.
The army clashes with a rebel group after an attempted robbery in Sininkine.
Police use tear gas on a soccer riot.  One person is hit in the head by a tear gas canister and dies.
An organization of ex-soldiers marches in favor of peace.
A man self-immolates in front of the presidential palace.  The cause is not immediately known.
Rebels clash with the army.
Anti-government protesters march against the president.  The government makes arrests, claiming to have thwarted a coup.
Rebels attack and loot a town.
A landmine explodes and kills a soldier.
The youth group Fed Up protests against a proposed change to the constitution that would allow the presidents' son to take power as vice president.  The next day, riots erupt across the country.  The violence prompts the president to cancel the amendment.
Thousands riot over frequent power cuts.
Opposition protesters amass on the one-month anniversary of the country's largest ever riots, demanding that the president not run for a third term.
The government organizes a massive rally in favor of the president.
Rebels rob a convoy of soldiers and civilians.  They also attack soldiers in Diango.
Rebels rob a convoy of soldiers and civilians.  They also attack soldiers in Diango.
Rebels attack two villages.
Rebels attack two villages.
Several hundred opposition supporters demonstrate against the president's plan to run for a third term.
Rebels attack a village.
The army clashes with rebel forces.
The army clashes with rebel forces.
Supporters of opposing parties clash, leaving one man dead.
Hundreds march to demand that the army set up outposts to protect the population from rebels.
Professors at 5 universities took part in protracted strike over new classrooms and housing, university budgets, and housing allowances.
Professors at 5 universities took part in protracted strike over new classrooms and housing, university budgets, and housing allowances.
Professors at 5 universities took part in protracted strike over new classrooms and housing, university budgets, and housing allowances.
Professors at 5 universities took part in protracted strike over new classrooms and housing, university budgets, and housing allowances.
Professors at 5 universities took part in protracted strike over new classrooms and housing, university budgets, and housing allowances.
Public transport workers went on 2-day strike, people resorted to horse-drawn carts to travel. Those who didn't follow strike were forced off the road.
Students burned tires and attacked patrol stations during demonstration to demand money and equipment for school. Police used tear gas, soldier shot and killed Bissau-Guinean student.
Transport workers went on strike to protest high fuel prices and police harassment, strike ended early after request from Muslim leaders ahead of religious holiday.
Fuel strike closed down gas stations for three days.
Citizens demonstrated to call for departure of president and to protest ahead of court decision regarding his candidacy, ruling party HQ burned and national highway blocked in other cities. Police used tear gas and beat protesters with batons, citizens threw rocks and set fires. Policeman stoned to death, journalist assaulted by police.
Citizens demonstrated to call for departure of president and to protest ahead of court decision regarding his candidacy, ruling party HQ burned and national highway blocked in other cities. Police used tear gas and beat protesters with batons, citizens threw rocks and set fires. Policeman stoned to death, journalist assaulted by police.
Citizens demonstrated to call for departure of president and to protest ahead of court decision regarding his candidacy, ruling party HQ burned and national highway blocked in other cities. Police used tear gas and beat protesters with batons, citizens threw rocks and set fires. Policeman stoned to death, journalist assaulted by police.
Opposition supporters gathered outside police station to show support for Alioune Tine, human rights activist being held by police.
Professors went on strike in Saint-Louis.
Opposition led long cortege of cars to police commissariat that surrounded station to protest detention of human rights activist Alione Tine.
Citizens demonstrated to protest president's plan to run for third term, police fired on crowd after running out of tear gas. 60 yr-old woman and 17 yr-old boy killed.
Students demonstrated against a strike by their professors, policeman injured.
Citizens demonstrated against court ruling allowing President Wade to run for third term against constitutional term limit, youths lobbed rocks at police and burnt tires. Police used tear gas and water hoses to disperse crowd, anti-riot truck driven into crowd.  Student killed in incident.
Student demonstrators set fire to bus and threatened to march on presidential palace day after classmate killed in demonstrations against president, police used tear gas and rubber bullets against crowd. Incident started as students wanted to leave campus for hospital where body was kept.
Opposition supporters gathered to pray for those killed during protests and to call for removal of president from office.
Opposition candidates and supporters demonstrated against President Wade's bid for 3rd term in office in violation of constitution.
Opposition supporters protested against President Abdoulaye Wade
Demonstrators threw rocks at caravan carrying president, attempted to prevent convoy from arriving when police fired tear gas.
Demonstrators gathered to protest the third term candidacy of President Wade.
Attempt by movement to begin a permanent sit-in to protest president's candidacy for 3rd term was blocked by police as it started.
Demonstrators protesting president's candidacy for 3rd term marched against government ban to within blocks of presidential palace, police fired tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse crowd.
Demonstrations began with sleep-in to protest candidacy of president, event later escalated as citizens seized 3 blocks and battled police who fired tear gas (including into mosque) and water cannons, chased down protesters, and made arrests . Youths set tires ablaze and threw rocks at police. Dieye briefly detained by authorities. Music icon and activist Youssou Ndour injured.
Citizens demonstration to protest desecration of mosque by police in Dakar where police fired tear gas, youth died after being hit by tear gas grenade.
Demonstrators set up burning barricades and mayor's house burned in holy city of Tivaouane.
Several hundred youths attempted to hold demonstration, were turned away by police.
Women protested against President Abdoulaye Wade
A truck carrying polling material was attacked on election day.
Police fired tear gas on crowds gathering outside polling station where president was expected to vote.
About 30 youths, women, and elderly Mauritanian refugees went on hunger strike to demand relocation to a 3rd country due to food and employment issues.
Police repressed a citizen
Stone-throwing demonstrators went to paramilitary headquarters to demand punishment for death of man in custody, police fired tear gas.
Citizens demonstrated outside of Gambian Embassy to protest execution by firing squad of Senegalese citizens in Gambia.
Angry Senegal soccer fans rioted after their team lost match, attacked Ivory Coast supporters and started fires. Police fired tear gas into stands.
Supporters of Tioune vandalized rioted to protest imprisonment of Muslim leader, damaging several buses.
Supporters of Tioune vandalized cars and shops outside of prison to protest imprisonment of Muslim leader, police fired tear gas and made arrests.
MDFC attacked a bank and government forces, but were repelled by government troops
MDFC used a landmine to kill two
University Students set fire to themselves in protest against the decision on the part of the university to cancel credits offered in the geography department
Thousands of protesters demonstrated against the release Karim Wade after he was arrested for corruption
Two students are wounded when soldiers fire in the air. Students are protesting for school improvements.
Four men attack gay men.
Protests erupt nationwide over the arrest of a rapper known for speaking out against corruption.
Supporters of Wade attempt to get into a court where he is being tried for corruption.
Students demanding the government pay scholarships protest; police kill one.
A mob tries to attack an Ebola patient from Guinea.
Around 1500 people marched against caricatures of the Prophet Mohammed in the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo.
democracy supporters held several demonstrations and protests throughout 1990 against Kerekou's dictatorship
government workers strike in response to lack of pay and failing economy
Kerekou government supporters attacked opposition supporters during the presidential campaign
civil servants strike in opposition to government program to lay off 8,000 workers
Kerekou supporters interferring with presidential elections with violence and intimidation
Kerekou supporters attacked President-elect Soglo supporters
civil servants in agriculture and treasury strike against expected job cutbacks
civil servants in finance, planning, commerce, education and industry ministries strike against job cutbacks, wages and poor living conditions
civil servants in telecommunications, electrical and water departments strike against pay deductions
civil servants in transportation, telecommunications, electricty and water sectors strike against pay deductions.
students strike against changes to the academic year
Parties unknown bomb the customs office.  The bombers are believed to be connected to parliamentary opposition in an ongoing battle over the budget.
Parties unknown bomb the home of a government minister.  The bombers are believed to be connected to parliamentary opposition in an ongoing battle over the budget.
Parties unknown fire rockets into a building due to hold a summit of French speaking nations.
bombing of the Cotonou Conference Centre
Rebels attack a gendarme patrol and kill 2.  The rebels are said to be connected to an ex-president, who is standing as a candidate in the current election.
gunmen fire into the homes of the constitutional court in response to the early decision that Kerekou had won the presidential election.  The court is due to announce its decision.
civil servants strike demanded past due wages
teachers strike over proposed budget for 1998
football fans fight after game
nurses and midwives strike to demand professional exams and reclassification of wage levels
nurses and midwives strike to demand professional exams and reclassification of wage levels
civil servants strike to demand increased wages and better living conditions
civil servants renew strike demanding increased wages and better living conditions
Teachers strike demanding past due wages
civil servants strike demanding the government follow through with promises made in February to pay wage bonuses
An attempted assassination is made against the vice-chairman of the election commission.
students from Niger hold 6 embassy officials hosstage while on hunger strike demanding payment of bursaries
vigilante groups attack suspected thieves and criminals
University professors strike demanding promotions and seniority status.
civil servants strike demanding payment of past due wages
civil servants renew strike demanding government follow through with agreement reached earlier in the month
students protest demanding the abillity to return to classes.  Professors have been on strike since Oct.
prisoners riot over slow pace of judicial system
oil workers strike in response to government freeze on company accounts
citizens demonstrating against the arrival of Robert Guei (Ivory Coast self declared President-elect)
student protests to increase scholarships and improve studying conditions
civil servants strike demanding past due wages
random violence attacking polling stations during presidential run off
student protests over suspension of four other student protesters
Air Afrique workers strike demanding past due wages
custom agents strike in response to corruption probe launched by the finance ministry
Bandits attack a civilian convoy, killing 4.
Bandits attack a convoy of civilians, killing 2.
Nigerian bandits battle against Benin and Nigerian troops.
railway workers strike protesting monopolies preventing them from transporting goods outside the country
workers strike over salary and career advancement
student demonstrations over governments response to teacher strikes
government workers strike demanding higher wages
protest against the refusal of the interior ministry to recognize decisions made under the PRB congress in January
Soglo supporters ransacked polling stations due to what they claimed was a fraudulant polling system
protest again the Iraq war
Journalists stop reporting in response to police brutality
magistrates strike requesting more freedom from the executive branch
truck drivers strike protesting police harrassment
teachers strike demanding tax cuts and wage increases
public sector workers strike demanding wage increases
students violently protest government's choice of head of the university
television and radio workers strike against empolyer's plan to open a third television station
magistrates strike in response to intimidation and call for greater security from the central government
civil servants strike demanding elections be held on schedule
Nigerian gang members crossed the border to demand the return of one of their own.  Violence began when the boy was not returned by the police.
opposition party protests presidential election irregularities
students protest against French presidential hopeful Sarkozy's restrictive immigration plan
illegal gasoline vendors protest the central government's decision to ban the illegal sale of gasoline
protests over the government's decision to extend lawmaker terms from four to five years
Unknown attackers fire at the president's convoy as he travels to campaign for legislative elections.
A small group carries out an armed robbery of two banks.  Six are killed in the shootout with the army.
Pirates attack a ship off the Benin coast, killing a Ukrainian sailor.
1000 protesters gather to denounce an incomplete electoral list ahead of the March 6 presidential elections.  Police disperse the protest with tear gas.
About 200 people block roads into the capital to demand a postponement of the presidential vote.
Hundreds of opposition supporters protest in front of the electoral commission, claiming that the results of a recent election were mishandled.
Police fire tear gas to disperse opposition supporters that had gathered in front of their candidate's house to protest election results.
Police fire tear gas to disperse youths protesting the reelection of the president.
Pirates attack the MP Sea King, a chemical tanker, off the port of Cotonou.
Pirate seize an Italian tanker 23 nautical miles south of Cotonou.
Pirates board a Swedish tanker, but are chased away by the Benin navy.
Customs officials launch a two day strike to demand more security from pirate attacks.
Pirate seize a Cyprus flagged tanker and take hostages, who are released 10 days later.
Pirates rob a chemical tanker.
An American was kidnapped in Benin, though their identity as well as their captors' is unknown
Nearly 30,000 protesters gather in the economic capital to demand the holding of elections.
Tens of thousands of opposition and pro-government protesters hold separate protest marches in Cotonou.
Tens of thousands of opposition and pro-government protesters hold separate protest marches in Cotonou.
Arab dominated govt represses Soninke black Africans.
Protesters in unspecified villages protest support trucks of Paris-Dakar auto rally.  They protest in favor of Saddam Hussein.
10 hours of rioting caused by dispute over the price of bread.   Military vehicles and foot patrols deployed.
Blacks protest because they cannot register to vote.  Police fire tear gas.
Blacks protest around polling stations because they are not allowed to vote.  Riot police deploy and beat protesters.  Occurs in shantytowns around the capital.
Opposition party supporters gather in party headquarters.  Police surround the building and open fire.
Opposition supporters encircle security forces.  Soldiers react and kill 2 civilians.
Tens of thousands of people demonstrate against inauguration of the president.
Students and professors go on strike to protest the language of graduation certificates.
Lawyers strike over arrest of 3 human rights activists.  End date of strike is not specified, and therefore applied to the end of the month.
Opposition party organizes protest against slavery, and against detention of human rights activists that contributed to a French documentary on slavery.
Police arrest opposition leader (Ahmed Ould Daddah).
Students protest in favor of Taliaa party (a pro-Iraqi Baathist party) and Iraq.  Govt. accuses Iraq of stirring the protests after Mauritania recognized Israel.
Students protest govt. recognition of Israel.  Riot ensues.  Police beat and arrest rioters.  Dozens arrested.
Police arrest opposition leader (Ahmed Ould Daddah).  On 4/26, the Union of Democratic Forces stages protest of arrest.  Police arrest 2.
Islamic organization Hassem stages daily violent anti-Israeli/pro-Palestinian protests.  Govt. arrests several.
UDP-NE protests govt recognition of Israel.  Govt. reacts by banning the party.
1000s of protesters demonstrate against Israel and US.  Police fire tear gas.
Police use tear gas and clubs to crush pro-Palestinian rally.
Protest against US plans for war in Iraq.
Rally against war plans in Iraq, opposition leaders call for cutting ties to US and Britain.
Students protest against US plans for Iraq.  Police use tear gas.
Protest against US plans for war in Iraq.  Several parliamentarians join in.
Protest against Iraq War.  protesters throw rocks, prompting police to fire tear gas.
Over 40,000 protest against the War in Iraq.
4000 protesters demonstrate against Iraq War and relations with Israel.
Some 10,000 protesters demonstrate against Iraq War.
Government arrests leaders of pro-Iraqi/pan-Arabist party.  Several days later, govt arrests leader of Rally of Democratic Forces party.
Coup attempt.  Disgruntled soldiers free Mohamed Hassan Ould Dedaw and several other prominent Islamic leaders from jail and they attempt a power grab.  Fighting erupts around the capital and at least one tank division goes over to the rebels.
Protest ahead of election.  Supporters of Ould Haidalla, President Ould Taya's main opponent, demonstrate.  Police fire tear gas and beat people.  Police arrest Haidalla's sons.
Police arrest the leading opposition candidate twice in four days during election period.  He is accused of plotting a coup.
Students strike demanding union recognition, an internet caf?, canteen meals, and transportation.
protesters demonstrate against Israel's killing of Hamas leader Ahmed Yassin.
Two days of street protests denounce Mauritania's ties with Israel.  Begin with 700 students on day 1.  Next day, 5000 protests enter the streets.  Provoked by Israel's killing of Hamas leader Abdelaziz Rantissi.
Police use tear gas and clubs to crush protest denouncing arrest of three Islamist leaders accused of distributing fake torture photos of jailed prisoners.
200 female demonstrators protest jailing of 3 Islamist leaders.  Police use tear gas and clubs.
30 women protest outside UN offices against arrest by govt. of women arrested in connection with coup plots.  Several are briefly detained, one is arrested.
Jailed Islamist leaders stage hunger strike.  Govt. releases them.
Families of 32 jailed coup plotters protest for visitation rights.  Plotters then begin hunger strike to protest their treatment in prison.
About 100 men protest that they have been unemployed for 10 years after receiving their doctoral degrees.  They accuse the govt of corruption and nepotism.  Police shove protesters and force an end to the demonstration.
Authorities arrest five Islamic leaders, three accused of distributing fake photos of tortured prisoners to the media.
Students rally to protest upcoming visit by Israeli foreign minister.
300 stone throwing students protest visit by Israeli foreign minister.  Police use batons and tear gas, arrest five.
300 protesters march in support of jailing of Islamic leaders.  Police use truncheons and tear gas.
44 imprisoned opposition leaders go on hunger strike
Gunmen linked to al Qaeda attack and kill 15 soldiers
About 150 GSPC militants from Algeria raid a Mauritanian military base, killing 15.  GSPC claims responsibility as revenge for arrest of Islamic leaders.
The military stages a coup while the President is out of the country.   Gunshots and explosions are heard around the capital.  There are no reported deaths.  Upon receipt of the news, several spontaneous demonstrations erupt.
New junta releases old regime's political prisoners, including those accused of orchestrating failed coups in 2003 and 2004.  Moderate Islamists also freed.  Thousands of Mauritanians rush into the streets to celebrate and greet the released pr
Govt. arrests (on 6/19) several officials from the old regime, overthrown in 8/2005.
Family members of jailed loyalists of the old regime stage sit in on 7/10/2006 at the junta offices.  Police use tear gas to disperse them.
4000 people protest Zionist aggression and show solidarity with Lebanon and Palestine.  Occurs due to Israeli invasion of Lebanon.
Inmates at capital's main prison riot and take control of the prison.
300-400 people riot and clash with police in protest against rising food prises.  Protests in Kankossa lead to the police shooting of 1 person
300-400 people riot and clash with police in protest against rising food prises.  Protests in Kankossa lead to the police shooting of 1 person
300-400 people riot and clash with police in protest against rising food prises.  Protests in Kankossa lead to the police shooting of 1 person
Peaceful student march against high food prices explodes into violence when passersby join in and begin looting.  Army disperses them.
Suspects kill and rob 4 French tourists in Aleg.  Govt. says suspects are affiliated with militant group Al-Qaeda in Mahgreb.  Arrests are eventually made.
In Ghallawiya, Al Qaeda assailants shoot and kill 3 soldiers.
protesters engage in a week of furious protests in front of the Israeli embassy over Israeli policies in the Gaza strip.
2000 students protest against Danish cartoons caricaturing the Prophet Mohammed.  Police break up the protest with tear gas.
About 3000 students march in front of the parliament complex against Israeli policy in Gaza.  They call on the govt. to break ties with Israel.
Between 3 and 28 suspected Islamic extremists go on hunger strike to demand better detention conditions.
The presidential guard stages a coup, arresting Mauritania's first democratically elected president.  They are upset with corruption and his efforts at reaching out to hardliners.
Government arrests prime minister of recently ousted president as attempts to attend a demonstration in his home village.  He is place under house arrest.  No further information on the demonstration is given.
Al Qaeda kidnaps and murders 12 Mauritanian soldiers.
Govt. issues a ban on protests.  Opposition parties defy by calling a protest on 10/5.  Police break up protest by beating protesters with clubs and tear gas.
Police clash with protesters organized by four labor unions.  Violence erupts when riot police attack demonstation with tear gas.  Demonstrators repond by throwing stones at police.
Protest organized against junta govt.  Police break up the demonstration.
University students riot daily to protest against an Israeli offensive in Gaza.  The police respond with tear gas and batons.
Anti riot police fire tear gas at 200 people demonstrating against the planned elections in June.  The protesters rally in support of Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, ousted by a coup in August 2008.
An opposition group protests against the leaders of the junta and their plans to hold an election in June.
A group of protesters demonstrates against junta chief Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz when he visits Tidjikja.  They call for the release of the former prime minister from prison.
Opposition groups stage a sit-in outside the state television station to demand that the junta open up the airwaves.
Several thousand protesters take to the streets to demonstrate against the junta's plan for elections in June.
Hundreds of people demonstrate to welcome home anti-coup negotiators from Dakar.
Gunmen attempt to kidnap an American teacher and kill him when he tries to resist.  Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Mahgreb eventually takes credit.
Suspected al Qaeda militants kill an American teacher after he resisted kidnapping
A shoot out erupts between police and Islamic militants.
A suicide bomber explodes outside the French embassy, wounding 3.
Islamic extremists kidnap 3 Spanish aid workers and transport them into Mali.
al Qaeda kidnaps Italian citizens
Islamic gunmen abduct 2 Italian aid workers.
A journalist's association protests for the release of a detained reporter.
Negro-Mauritanian students protest over the Arabisation of the government and clash with Moorish students.
Citizens protest Israeli attacks on an aid flotilla.
An Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb suicide bomber attacks a military barracks.
2010 Mauritania Government
Anti-slavery activists are arrested after a protest resulted in attacking a police station.
Arab Spring.  A man self-immolates in a protest over jobs, food prices, and governance.
Arab Spring.  Students use Facebook to organize a sit-in demanding the departure of the president.  They also burn pictures of Muammar Ghadafi.  Police use tear gas to disperse the protesters.
Police stop dozens of youths from ralling in the central square.
Mauritanian workers hold May Day rallies to demand better working conditions and higher salaries.
Miners strike at the local subsidiary of Canadian mining firm Kinross.
Students protest against the crackdown on anti-regime protests in Syria.
Protesters demonstrate against the census, claiming it discriminates against blacks.  Police shoot dead one protester.
Demonstrators riot against the census, claiming that it is racist.
Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb kidnapped paramilitary officer Ely Ould Moktar and demanded the release a prisoner in return for Moktar.
Members of We are all Ely Ould Moktar held a sit-in protest in Nouakchott to demand the government secure the release of paramilitary officer Ely Ould Moktar from Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb.
Students as well as various political and civilian groups participated in a protest outside Syria's embassy in Nouakchott. The demonstrators demanded Syrian diplomats be removed in light of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's abuse of democratic protesters.
Hundreds of members of the Islamic party Tewassoul demonstrated outside the Syrian embassy in Nouakchott in response to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's repressive treatment of protesters. The Tewassoul supporters demanded expulsion of Syrian diplomats.
The Coordination of a Democratic Oppostion, a coalition of opposition parties, held a lengthy series of weekly protests in Nouakchott demanding the resignation of President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz. Police arrested, beat, and tear gassed protesters on several occaisions. Some youth demonstrators resorted to throwing rocks and burning tires. Attendance ranged between hundreds and thousands.
Family members of sixteen moderate Dawa preachers gunned down by Mali troops protested outside President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz's palace in Nouakchott, demanding information about the deaths. The shooting occurred in Mali, but some of the victims were Mauritanian.
Hundreds of Muslims protested outside the U.S. embassy after the release of an anti-Muslim film in the U.S.
The Coordination of a Democratic Oppostion held a protest in Nouakchott to demand President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz step down in light of his health issues and alleged incompetance.
Thousands of supporters of President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz gathered in Nouakchott to welcome their leader back after he underwent medical treatment in France for forty days.
The Don't Touch My Nationality movement held a protest in support of black Mauritanians' rights and were subjected to teargas by police. One activist was also arrested and two injured.
Women protest the increasing number of rapes in Mauritanian capital Nouakchott
Gold miners went on strike arguing for higher wages and better working conditions
Opposition protesters marched in boycott of the new election. The police broke up the protest violently
Islamic prisoners are demanding some movement on their cases as they are held indefinitely
Thousands took to the streets burning tires and clashing with police after news spread of four Qurans being desecrated at a mosque.
Dozens of supporters of anti-slavery activists stormed the courthouse after three activists were sentenced to two years in prison.
Thousands protested in the capital against a Charlie Hebdo cartoon of prophet Mohammed, but were prevented by police from reaching the French embassy.
After several days of a hunger strike, inmates at the central penitentiary took two prison guards hostage to demand that prisoners who had completed their sentences be released.
Miners in Zourate held a nine-week strike to demand wage increases and ended the strike after negotiations.
More than 100 supporters of an anti-slavery organization protested the continued imprisonment of two activists.
Hundreds of students protest govt hiring freeze on civil servants, including for university graduates.  Police open fire and kill 3.
Govt. admits that 63 Tuaregs were killed in clash with security forces.
Strikes by most of the workforce lead govt. to reconsider demands for political pluralism.
Prisoners in Niamey prison riot over police corruption.  335 prisoners escape.
1991 Niger Government
Govt. kills 6 people in three vehicles that fail to stop in two separate incidents.
Govt. kills 6 people in three vehicles that fail to stop in two separate incidents.
67 prisoners break out in protest against their bad conditions.
Soldiers in Niamey mutiny over pay arrears and the imprisonment of several officers, take over a radio station.  protesters demonstrate against these actions.  A general strike occurs on 3/2/1992 to protest the soldiers.
Teachers strike over pay and conditions.
Women protest being harassed by people that blame them for a drought.
Hundreds attack bars and bordellos used by women accused of causing a drought.
5000 people protest election delays.
Tuareg rebels attack civilians.
Thousands of students protest and riot through the streets calling on the govt. to save the schools.  Govt. reacts by closing the schools.
19 student prisoners begin hunger strike in rural Kollo prison (refer to event in line 8).  The hunger strikers are joined by 150 colleagues at an unknown location.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations nationwide.  They seize control of at least Zinder and take 12 senior civil servants as hostages.  The soldiers demand back pay and cancellation of auterity.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations nationwide.  They seize control of at least Zinder and take 12 senior civil servants as hostages.  The soldiers demand back pay and cancellation of auterity.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations nationwide.  They seize control of at least Zinder and take 12 senior civil servants as hostages.  The soldiers demand back pay and cancellation of auterity.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations nationwide.  They seize control of at least Zinder and take 12 senior civil servants as hostages.  The soldiers demand back pay and cancellation of auterity.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations nationwide.  They seize control of at least Zinder and take 12 senior civil servants as hostages.  The soldiers demand back pay and cancellation of auterity.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations nationwide.  They seize control of at least Zinder and take 12 senior civil servants as hostages.  The soldiers demand back pay and cancellation of auterity.
MNSD stages protest over arbitariness of govt. appointments.  Five people are wounded in clash with police, 10 are arrested.
Four people (Nigerian pro-democracy militants) hijack a Nigeria Airways jet carrying 150 people, including a Chinese Vice President.  The plane lands in Niamey.  Most of the hostages are eventually released.
Conflict between farmers and ranchers over land use.  Violence begins when a Nigerian farmer is killed by a Niger rancher.  150 Nigerians retaliate and burn a Niger ranching camp to the ground.
Niger's 850 customs officers stage strike over security concerns.  Smugglers and customs men have traded shots, and people have died.  Custom's trade union wants better security.
Several days during which hundreds of students riot over govt. failure to pay overdue grants.
8000 people protest in front of the parliament building to protest the banning of a woman's march (itself planned in response to the govt. closing of Niamey University).
Almost 1000 protesters demonstrate, calling for release of arrested student union leader.
Niger's 850 customs officers again go on strike over security issues.
Niamey airport closed when workers strike to warn officials against pay cuts and privatization.
Students protesting unpaid grants stage violent protest.  One student is hit in the face with a tear gas cannister and dies.
3 opposition parties call protest for the day of the president's first anniversary in power.  The militants barricade streets with burning tires and clash with police.  1 killed, 20 injured.
1994 Niger Government
1994 Niger Government
General strike.
Around 100 students protest the non-payment of grants.  Protest turns violent when police try to dismantle barricades.  One injured.
Miners strike to demand better protection against Tuareg raids.
At a pro-Tuareg rally in Agades, two Niger soldiers throw grenades into the crowd, killing 6.
Niger's teachers strike demanding better pay.
Niger's national labor federation (UTSN) calls on public sector employees to strike for 48 hours.  Although some workers strike, most do not.  Strike is over pay increases.
Accused mastermind of 1993 hijacking stages 2 week hunger strike.  Govt. eventually promises to deal with his case quickly.
About 100 protesters demonstrate against imprisonment of accused mastermind of 1993 hijacking. (see line 12).
3000 people demonstrate in front of the state media building at the bidding of a union that recruits from govt. workers.
Thousands of people surge into the streets to support their parties in advance of an election.
Thousands of workers take to the streets to protest lack of pay and govt's careless attitude.
Journalists and technical staff at Niger's state media stage strike over salary arrears.
4000 people organized by human rights groups, unions, parties, and parents associations protest and call for a rescue plan for the cash strapped schools and university.
Fulani and Toubou tribesmen clash over cattle rustling.
Five men caught attacking a military outpost.  A day later, the Niger military kills them.  15 others are captured.
15 Tuaregs of umbrella resistance organization (OAR) clash with Arab militiamen.  15 OAR militants killed.
Chadian rebels attack Niger soldiers.
Political groupings in president's home town stage general stay-home protest, causing a stoppage.  It ends suddenly with the unexpected arrival of a caravan.
2000 students hold a violent demonstration to claim a year's arrears in grants.
Military overthrows the govt.  5 die in brief fighting.  Military action claimed as arising from corruption of civilian govt.
Thousands of people march to support the recent coup.
Toubou rebels clash with soldiers in the Lake Chad region.
1996 Niger Government
Niger's mining sector strikes.
Several hundred opposition protesters gather to oppose elections in Niamey and Zinder.  Police use tear gas.
Several hundred opposition protesters gather to oppose elections in Niamey and Zinder.  Police use tear gas.
Teachers strike to protest election.
Student protest non payment of grants.  Police use tear gas.
Thousands of anti-govt protesters demonstrate.  Police use tear gas.
2000 people protest arrest of 3 opposition leaders.
Electricity workers strike to protest privitization.
Govt workers strike for overdue wages.
protesters organized by opposition parties.  Police use tear gas.
Electricity workers strike to protest arrest of a dozen colleagues in an earlier strike.
Civil servants strike over pay cuts.
Civil servants strike over pay cuts.
Civil servants strike over pay cuts.
Health care workers strike nationwide.
1997 Niger Government
Teachers strike over outstanding pay.
Students protest unpaid allowances.
Students protest unpaid allowances.
Teachers strike over outstanding pay.
Students gather to commemorate the killing of student protesters on 2/6/1990.
Soldiers mutiny in Diffa region to protest living and working conditions.  Take several hostages.  Mutiny spreads to Agadez on 2/25, Zinder and Arlit on 2/26.  Uprisings end by 2/28.
40,000 workers close all govt. offices throughout the country.
40,000 workers close all govt. offices throughout the country.
Demonstrators demand ouster of President Ibrahim Bare Mainassara, clash with police in running street battles.  Several are injured.
40,000 workers close all govt. offices throughout the country.  USTN calls for payment of salary arrears, and an end to privatization.
Police use tear gas to break up a protest against a visit by ruling party chief.  Protest devolves into clash.  Several injured.
Civil aviantion personnel strike to protest in favor of refunding taxes and payment of indemnities.
Opposition demonstration in Niamey.
Opposition rally organized by opposition parties.
Famers and ranchers clash over land.
Paramilitary Republican Guard revolts and takes hostages, demanding back pay.  Military forces storm Guard headquarters.  Several injured.
Schools fail to reopen because of a boycott by three teachers unions demanding unpaid salaries.
Teachers strike to protest salary arrears.
Students launch work stoppage to protest lack of educational resources and lack of teachers.
40,000 people strike for two days over salary issues.
Military overthrows the govt.  7 die in brief fighting, including president Ibrahim Bare Mainassara, shot by his own security guards.  New junta claims it is guaranteeing republican order and national unity.
Police use tear gas to break up a student protest.
Tearchers stage strike over salary arrears.
Prisoners riot over the slow handling of their cases.  Police repress, 28 die.
Several unions stage strike over salary arrears.
Prisoners in Zinder prison riot to protest prison killings in Niamey.  74 escape.
40,000 workers close all govt. offices throughout the country.  USTN calls for payment of salary arrears.
Tearchers stage strike over salary arrears.  They strike in Oct., return to work briefly in November, but return to strike action.  They vote in Dec. to continue strike.
Nurses and social assistants strike over salary arrears.
Soldiers run mutiny and run riot.  In Arlit they protest backpay.  In Agadez they protest the jailing of two colleagues accused of rape.
Soldiers run mutiny and run riot.  In Arlit they protest backpay.  In Agadez they protest the jailing of two colleagues accused of rape.
Hundreds of students protest late bursary payments.  Police break up protest with tear gas.
Several dozen protest against planned amnesty of coup-plotters.
University professors strike over back pay.
Media workers strike over back pay.
Revenue collection workers strike over unpaid bonuses.
Police use tear gas to break up a student protest.  Student motive unknown.
Teachers strike over back pay and forced retirements.
Several hundred disabled people march to protest their marginalization.
Teachers strike over back pay.
Nearly 1000 teachers protest over back pay.
Hundreds of Muslims riot, demanding the cancellation of a fashion show in Niamey and Maradi.  Police use tear gas.
Hundreds of Muslims riot, demanding the cancellation of a fashion show in Niamey and Maradi.  Police use tear gas.
More than 1000 people demonstrate against exclusion of political opponents from public sector jobs.
Nurses and social assistants strike over salary arrears.
Several thousand supporters of Prime Minister's party protest against censure motion against the PM passed by the parliament.
Nurses and social assistants strike over working conditions.
Students protest plans to change their grants.  Police use tear gas in Maradi, eventually use force against protesters in Niamey.  There are many days of protests.  On 2/21, police clash with protesters, one police officer dies.
Students protest plans to change their grants.  Police use tear gas in Maradi, eventually use force against protesters in Niamey.  There are many days of protests.  On 2/21, police clash with protesters, one police officer dies.
Students protest working conditions, demand democracy, and commemorate student killings in Feb. 1990.
Students protest, demanding reopening of the university.
Hospital staff protests against govt. cuts to special pay allowances.
Customs officials strike to protest security issues (2 colleagues were shot dead by smugglers).
Ethnic clash over grazing rights.
Students protest jailing of 18 peers.  Protest turns violent when students clash with police and opposing student factions.  Several wounded.
Students protest scholarship arrears, briefly detain Higher Education minister.
Students demand reopening of a closed campus.  Police break up the protest.
Students protest school reforms.  Police disperse the protest.
Students protest killing of student demonstrators on 2/19/1990.
Truck drivers protest harassment at border checkpoints.  Police open fire, kill 1.
3000 women protest a wave of child sex cases, accusing govt. of failing to respond.
6000 students protest for release of imprisoned student leaders.
Thousands protest on behalf of Palestinians.
Students protest scholarship arrears.  Police fire tear gas.
Truck drivers strike after being accused by Republican Guard forces of witchcraft.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations, demanding better pay.  They sieze control of Diffa, N'gourti, and N'guigmi.  Fighting occurs in the capital.  Govt. forcibly ends the mutiny.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations, demanding better pay.  They sieze control of Diffa, N'gourti, and N'guigmi.  Fighting occurs in the capital.  Govt. forcibly ends the mutiny.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations, demanding better pay.  They sieze control of Diffa, N'gourti, and N'guigmi.  Fighting occurs in the capital.  Govt. forcibly ends the mutiny.
Soldiers mutiny in several locations, demanding better pay.  They sieze control of Diffa, N'gourti, and N'guigmi.  Fighting occurs in the capital.  Govt. forcibly ends the mutiny.
Several thousand Muslims protest the War in Iraq.
3000 protesters against the War in Iraq.
Several hundred students protest for a better living.  Security forces use tear gas.
3000 people protest arrest of a journalist.
Student protest non payment of grants.  Police use tear gas.
Union of magistrates boycotts local elections to protest law requiring them to swear on the Koran.
Protest of new Value Added Tax.  The protest turns violent.  47 organizers arrested.
Stay home strike to protest VAT tax.  Protest of unknown size occurs in Zinder over the same issue.
Stay home strike to protest VAT tax.  Protest of unknown size occurs in Zinder over the same issue.
One day, nationwide general strike against the cost of living and the VAT.  Occurs in largest Nigerien cities (Niamey and Zinder).  Demonstrators clash with police in Maradi and southwest Tahoua.
One day, nationwide general strike against the cost of living and the VAT.  Occurs in largest Nigerien cities (Niamey and Zinder).  Demonstrators clash with police in Maradi and southwest Tahoua.
Thousands of people rally outside the Parliament, protesting the VAT.  Violence flares in Agadez: protesters hurl stones, police use tear gas.
Thousands of people rally outside the Parliament, protesting the VAT.  Violence flares in Agadez: protesters hurl stones, police use tear gas.
Thousands of people rally outside the Parliament, protesting the VAT.  Violence flares in Agadez: protesters hurl stones, police use tear gas.
Thousands of people rally outside the Parliament, protesting the VAT.  Violence flares in Agadez: protesters hurl stones, police use tear gas.
Thousands of people rally outside the Parliament, protesting the VAT.  Violence flares in Agadez: protesters hurl stones, police use tear gas.
Thousands protest the arrest of two anti-slavery activists.
50,000 protesters demonstrate against Danish cartoons caricaturing Prophet Mohammed.
Students fight running street battles with police, protesting poor living conditions.
protesters decry high cost of living.
Several areas of the capital shut down by strike against cost of living.
General strike over cost of living.
General strike over cost of living.
Suspected rebels kidnap several tourists, releasing them a few days later.
Govt. begins expelling nomadic Mahamic Arabs from the remote Diffa region.  About 150 Arabs protest on the 28th.  Unknown number of Peulh and Toubou protest that same day against the Arabs.
Several thousand demonstrate, demanding expulsion of the Mahamids.
2007 Niger Government
Protest showing support for govt. during time of Tuareg rebellion.
protesters demonstrate against rising cost of living and govt. failure to deal with Tuareg unrest.
Inter-communal clash.  Skirmishes between villagers over accusations of stock rustling.
protesters demand the release of the jailed ex-Prime Minister.
protesters demonstrate against lifting the president's term limits.
protesters rally across Niger to protest a budget awarding legislators benefits and expenses.
Local bandits or rebels abduct a number of tourists and UN officials and trade them to Al-Qaeda.  The UN official is held captive for four months.
protesters demonstrate against effort to extend the president's term.
Protests are organized against Israeli military action in Gaza.
Several thousand people organized by three unspecified human rights groups protest to demand that members of parliament repay large salary bonuses to the national treasury.
An opposition party organizes a protest against the president's attempt to amend the consitution to allow him to run for as many terms in office as he chooses.
protesters riot against a planned referendum allowing the president to run for a third term.
Tens of thousands of people organized by a front consisting of political parties, unions, and rights groups demonstrate against the president's plans for a third term.
Thousands of workers strike to protest against efforts by the president to change the constitution so that he can run for a third term.
The FDD stages a general strike to protest the president's plan to run for a third term.
The FDD organizes a protest against the president's plan to run for a third term.
An association of independent newspaper editors stages a one week strike against a presidential decree allowing the government to sanction private newspapers without warning.
Trade unions stage a general strike to protest the president's plan to run for a third term.
Public sector union stages a strike to demand pay raises.
Protesters opposed to an ongoing referendum clash with police.  The police use tear gas.
Protesters opposed to an ongoing referendum clash with police.  The police use tear gas.
Protesters opposed to an ongoing referendum clash with police.  The police use tear gas.
Police teargas a crowd of political figures and activists who had to come to attend the trial of a prominent journalist and opposition leader.
Police use tear gas on protesters demonstrating against the new consitutution allowing the president to serve a third term.  Groups of activists then spread out through the city, burning tires and setting up roadblocks.
A coalition of seven public and private sector unions strike to demand pay increases and a cut in the income tax.
Gunmen target six Muslims as they say morning prayers.
About 1000 former MPs and their supporters march to demand the reinstatment of parliament.  The police fire tear gas into the crowd, which responds by throwing rocks.
Thousands protest in the capital against an election in which the president is standing for a third term.
Thousands of people take to the streets to demand that the president step down.
Tens of thousands of protesters take to the streets to call for the president to step down.
Thousands of people march to support the president and his efforts to amend the constitution for a third term.  They also chant for Niger's sovereignty and condemn the EU and ECOWAS, which have imposed sanctions.
Trade unions strike to demand a pay increase, a tax cut, and protest against the president seeking a third term.
Unknown gunmen kill 3 Saudi tourists.
Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb militants attack soldiers and civilians near the border.
Soldiers stage a coup, ousting the president.
Citizens march to express support for the military junta that staged a coup.
Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb militants attack soldiers in a border military post.
Former communications minister protests his house arrest under the military junta.
Students protest the non-application of an agreement over education supplies.
Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb kidnaps seven foreign workers.
Kidnappers abduct two French tourists from a bar.  The hostages are later killed during a gun battle when French military forces intervene.
The army clashes with AQIM.
Clashes occur between protesters and police outside a courthouse where an opposition politician is on trial for preparing protest demonstrations.
Farmers and herders fought south of the capital after a court decision awarded a disputed plot of land to one group.
Muslims and Christians clashed
Unidentified gunmen kidnapped several Nigerien and Chadian aid workers at gunpoint, heading north for the desert region of Agadez.
Hundreds gathered in Niamey to protest high petrol prices.
Students demonstrated demanding more revenue for Niger from the French mining operations
Islamist Militants bombed a French Uranium Mine and Government Army Base
Gunmen attacked a prison in Niamey
Gunmen attacked a police training facility
Pro government protesters demonstrated in support of the government in its upcoming negotiations with Areva
Pro government protesters demonstrated in support of the government in its upcoming negotiations with Areva
Hundreds of protesters march in the capital against French nuclear company Areva and lack of transparency with uranium mining contracts.
Niger military forces arrest and kill a number of militants in a raid on the town of Diffa.
Unidentified gunmen open fire on the house of the assembly president who was out of the country. No injuries or arrests were made.
protesters demonstrate against the French nuclear company Areva for lack of transparency with uranium mining.
Hundreds of university students riot and clash with police in response to delays in payment of their grants.
Unidentified assailants throw Molotov cocktails at the ruling parties headquarters seriously injuring three.
Thousands of opposition members protest the arrest of opposition figures.
A series of coordinated simultaneous attacks kill 9 security agents in the Tillaberi region.
Thousands rioted in Zinder on January 16 and in Niamey on January 17 to protest Mohammed cartoons in Charlie Hebdo's post-attack "survivors' issue"; rioters burned 45 churches as well as French-owned and non-Muslim owned businesses; 10 were killed and at least 173 were injured.
Thousands rioted in Zinder on January 16 and in Niamey on January 17 to protest Mohammed cartoons in Charlie Hebdo's post-attack "survivors' issue"; rioters burned 45 churches as well as French-owned and non-Muslim owned businesses; 10 were killed and at least 173 were injured.
Around 300 people demonstrated in a long-planned protest against poor governance, despite the government's ban on demonstrations following two days of rioting; police used tear gas and arrested more than 90 people.
Boko Haram attacked the towns of Diffa and Bosso; Niger's defense minister reported 109 Islamists were killed, as well as four soldiers and a civilian.
Boko Haram attacked the towns of Diffa and Bosso; Niger's defense minister reported 109 Islamists were killed, as well as four soldiers and a civilian.
Boko Haram staged a series of attacks in the Diffa region, beginning with an overnight attack on February 7 and an explosion in a market later in the day that injured at least fifteen; on Feb 9, Boko Haram attempted to raid a prison and a car bomb exploded; on February 17, 3 Boko Haram members attackeda military post in nearby Bagara with knives.
Boko Haram staged a series of attacks in the Diffa region, beginning with an overnight attack on February 7 and an explosion in a market later in the day that injured at least fifteen; on Feb 9, Boko Haram attempted to raid a prison and a car bomb exploded; on February 17, 3 Boko Haram members attackeda military post in nearby Bagara with knives.
A suicide bomber was shot while attempting to blow himself up near a military post; no other casualties occurred.
An unidentified plane carried out an air strike on the Niger side of Abadam, a town that straddles the border with Nigeria, killing 20-30 people.
The government organized a protest against Boko Haram, during which President Mahamadou stated "Niger will be the death of Boko Haram."
Boko Haram attacked the village of Karouga, killing 14 militants and 7 Nigerien soldiers.
Boko Haram attacked villages on three islands in Lake Chad, killing at least 19 civilians.
Boko Haram attacked the town of Bosso and was repelled by troops from Niger and Chad, who reported that 47 Boko Haram fighters died, while government troops suffered no casualties.
Boko Haram attacked the island town and military base of Karamga, killing 46 soldiers and 28 civilians.
Moussa Tchangari and Nouhou Arzika were arrested on charges of violating national security after speaking out against the government; the organization Tchangari heads released a report criticizing the government's lack of response to humanitarian emergencies following Boko Haram attacks.
Thousands marched in Niamey to express numerous grievances against the government, including power cuts, tax increases, a projected increase in parliament members, and lack of freedoms.
Boko Haram attacked two villages in southeast Niger on June 17, killing at least 40; the military began air strikes against Boko Haram the following day, and reported 15 militants killed between June 18 and June 23.
Boko Haram attacked two villages in southeast Niger on June 17, killing at least 40; the military began air strikes against Boko Haram the following day, and reported 15 militants killed between June 18 and June 23.
Boko Haram attacked the village of Yebbi, killing five and burning more than 100 homes.
Boko Haram militants slit the throats of five civilians working at a construction site in Dagaya.
Boko Haram fighters raided a prison in Diffa in an attempt to free fellow members; one soldier and three militants were killed.
Boko Haram attacked a town near Bosso, killing 16 civilians; the army reported that it killed 32 Boko Haram fighters over the next three days in "sweeping up" operations undertaken in response.
Around a dozen Boko Haram militants attacked a village on the border with Nigeria, killing 15 civilians and burning 22 houses.
Boko Haram fighters ambushed Niger soldiers on their way to Baroua, leading to a firefight in which two soliders were killed.
Four suicide bombers from Boko Haram set off two explosions in Diffa, killing one policeman, five civilians, and the four bombers.
Hundreds of college and high school students protested in Niamey to demand more teachers and classes; after the police used tear gas, some demonstrators began throwing stones, burning tires, and burning cars; 79 were arrested.
Soldiers attacked would-be suicide bombers in Diffa, triggering their explosive devices and killing two soldiers as well as the bombers.
Boko Haram militants attacked the village of Ala, executing 13 and injuring 3.
Supporters of ex-president Ousmane demonstrated in Zinder to protest the ban on Ousmane participating in next year's election; police used tear gas on protesters and some participants threw stones and blocked traffic.
Five journalists were detained in Niamey, including one who published an article criticizing the deputy police chief and two who were covering the arrival and arrest of opposition candidate Hama Amadou; Reporters Without Borders condemned the arrests.
Police clashed with supporters of presidential candidate Hama Amadou outside the Niamey airport, where he was arrested on charges of baby trafficking upon his return to the country.
Boko Haram attacked the village of Wogom, killing 18 people and burning down around 100 homes.
Boko Haram attacked a village near Diffa, killing 4 and torching 50 homes.
After conducting one month of surveillance, the government arrested 9 military officers said to be planning a coup, including an air force general and a former government chief of staff.
Students demand President's resignation, citing failure to properly attend to students' welfare
Medical workers strike, protesting proposed pay cuts
Soldiers seize airport, demanding higher wages and more allowances
Police strike, demanding higher wages, and some policemen shoot out tires of cars and buses.
Firefighters protest, demanding higher wages
Taxi drivers strike, demanding higher wages and attack drivers returning to work
Opposition supporters stage pro-democracy rally and are violently dispersed by police
Opposition supporters vandalize polling stations, claiming election was rigged
Opposing parties clash prior to election, resulting in multiple injuries
University lecturers strike, alleging  army raid on student housing resulted in deaths
Students protest army raid, alleging deaths and are attacked by police
Citizens gather to protest army raid, alleging deaths and multiple rapes of female students
Students protest raid and are attacked by police.
Students riot and kill fellow student, alleging he was a government informant.  Protests follow, as teachers refuse to hold classes.
Citizens march, calling for the government's resignation, citing incompetence
Citizens protest jail sentences imposed on journalists for insulting the President
Citizens march, protesting lack of available jobs and low salaries
Teachers strike, protesting decreases in benefits
Taxi drivers strike, demanding unpaid wages
Students march, demanding release of investigation regarding army raid
Students riot, smashing windows and burning cars, protesting president's refusal to punish commander responsible for raid
Students march, demanding punishment of commander responsible for raid in which several students were raped and beaten
Anti-government mobs attack main courthouse, demanding release of students detained for protests
Students march to mark one-year anniversary of military raid
FPI members of Parliament strike, protesting jail sentence imposed on party's leader
Soldiers seize hostages in the presidential palace, demanding higher wages
Students go on a hunger strike to protest poor conditions at universities
Citizens attack Ghanians after football loss to Ghana
Health workers strike, demanding unpaid wages
Students strike to press for release of detained students
Armed Liberians cross the border and loot villages on the Ivorian side.
Students go on hunger strike to protest lack of available jobs
Medical students strike, demanding changes in exams
Police are ordered to beat opposition leader in retaliation for the publication of an insulting article
Students go on hunger strike in support of striking students
Citizens protest beating of opposition leader
Citizens march, demanding political reforms and changes in government
Citizens protest polling laws for presidential elections
Women protest incumbent party's improper media use
Youth march to protest election laws
Citizens protest ban on demonstrations and are beaten by police
Air traffic controllers strike, demanding higher wages and benefits
Dock workers strike, demanding higher wages
Police attempt to break up meeting and clash with students
Students strike to press for release of detained students
Students ransack university buildings after grant lists published
Students strike, protesting hiring practices and lack of allowances
Students strike, protesting hiring practices and lack of allowances
Secondary school teachers strike, protesting poor living and working conditions
Truck drivers strike, protesting extortion practices by government
Students protest and boycott classes, demanding higher grants and reallocation of dormitories
Taxi drivers strike in protest after colleague killed by policeman
Telecom workers strike, protesting lower wages than expatriates
Niger students take civil servants hostage in an attempt to gain higher grants and better living conditions
Students attack and injure a lecturer, prompting permanent expulsion
Teachers strike in response to students attacking a colleague
Students protest and clash with police over new student tax
Students and parents protest decision to anull completion exams
Citizens protest constitutional changes that increase presidential power
Taxi drivers strike and citizens attack police station in response to driver being killed by police
Political opponents march, protesting constitutional reforms and rumored cancelation of elections
Fishemen clash over fishing locations
Students riot over non-payment of scholarships and loans
Students riot over non-payment of scholarships and loans
Students riot over non-payment of scholarships and loans
Students strike, demanding greater benefits
Students riot, protesting arrest of student union leaders
Citizens clash with police after opposition leader placed under house arrest
Opposition supporters march against president
Opposition supporters march against incumbent party and clash with police
Native Ivorians and Burkinabe clash over land disputes
Soldiers riot and attack civilians
Army enages in coup and deseats president
Mutinous soldiers shoot an officer
Mutinous soldiers riot, demanding higher wages
Citizens stage protest outside of French Embassy, protesting French Minister's comments
Citizens march in support of French minister's comments regarding election and are attacked by police
Citizens march in support of French minister's comments regarding election and are attacked by police
Gabonese students protest outside Gabonese Embassy
Students march against junta leader
Native Ivorians and Burkinabe clash over land disputes
Ivorian women march in support of opposition candidate and demand resignation of junta leader
Soldiers severely beat journalist that questioned presidential eligibility of junta leader
Mutinous soldiers attack home of junta leader
Journalists march, protesting beating of colleague
Students march in support of junta leader, denouncing international pressure
Students supporting opposing parties clash on multiple university campuses, killing one
Senior member of opposition party goes on hunger strike to protest government's refusal to let her leave the country
Students protest upcoming election
Opposition supporters go on hunger strike, protesting campaign of junta leader
Opposition supporters vandalize official buildings, protesting exclusion of their candidate
Citizens stage parade and protests leading up to elections
Citizens protest junta leader's declaration of victory
Mutinous soldiers clash with military after citizen riots
Citizens celebrate ousting of junta leader and begin attempts to oust loyalist soldiers
Opposition supporters demonstrate support for electoral commission
Ouattara supporters riot after Court decision excludes his candidacy
Citizens riot leading up to general elections
Mutinous soldiers attack state-owned televsion offices in attempted coup
Students attack immigrants, blaming them for attempted coup and unrest
Rally of Republicans supporters boycott elections, protesting exclusion of their candidate
Ivorians protest remarks made by Senegalese President about treatment of immigrants
Students clash with police during protest over living and working conditions
Students protest student union meeting and clash with police
Dock workers strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens clash leading up to municipal elections
Rival factions of the student union FESCI clash, killing 5.
Air Afrique workers strike over proposed pay and job cuts
Rival factions of the student union FESCI attack each other with machetes
Supporters of rival football clubs clash, killing one
Ivorians and Burkinabes clash over land dispute, killing 6
Citizens protest against alleged human rights abuses by government
Attackers wound 22 people by throwing a grenade into a wake.
Soldiers begin hunger strike, demanding reintegration to military
Cocoa producers strike, demanding the release of earmarked funds
Students attack Malian fishermen, attempting to force them out of the country
Teachers go on hunger strike, demanding unpaid wages
Air Afrique workers strike over proposed pay and job cuts
Citizens meet plane of opposition leader to support return to country
Families of Air Afrique crash victims protest delay of probe
Police protest and strike, demanding higher wages
Health workers and prison wardens strike, demanding unpaid wages
Judges march, demanding higher salaries
Judges strike, demanding higher wages
Ivorian housewives protest high cost of food and other essentials
Former Air Afrique employees go on hunger strike to protest unpaid wages
Traders protest police harassment and racketeering
Opposing political activists clash, killing 2
Citizens march, protesting decision to grant citizenship to leading political opponent
Customs and prison officials strike, demanding paramilitary status and higher wages
Citizens protest failure to distribute voter identification cards outside electoral commission office
Public transport workers strike, protesting death of colleague after police shooting
Handicapped Ivorians protest, demanding to be better accommodated in society
2002 Cote d'Ivoire Government
Citizens burn thousands of Burkinabe homes, blaming them for the uprising
Ivorian youths protest French ambassador's sheltering of opposition leader Ouattara and attack Burkinabe Embassy.
Citizens march, demanding resignation of President
Citizens march in support of government, demanding rebel soldiers surrender
Youths, wanting to support military efforts against rebels, attempt to commandeer cars and clash with Muslims defending drivers
Youths, wanting to support military efforts against rebels, attempt to commandeer cars and clash with Muslims defending drivers
Former soldiers demonstrate in support of government and denounce rebels
Citizens march against government, demanding President's resignation
Citizens demand French Embassy release opposition leader Ouattara, blaming him for uprising
Citizens rally with rebel soldiers
Citizens rally with rebel soldiers
Youths march in support of President and denounce rebels
Citizens attack funeral procession for rebel leader and destroy his body
Citizens protest presence of French troops and abuses from Ivorian troops
Citizens block gate to French Prime Minister's house and protest his policies toward Ivory Coast
Citizens march against government, demanding President's resignation
Citizens march in support of government, demanding rebel soldiers surrender
Citizens protest French peace agreement, claiming too much is given to rebels.  They attack multiple Embassies and many immigrant groups
Ivorians take over Abidjan Airport and block French planes from repatriating French citizens
Citizens march against Ivorian acceptance of French peace agreement, chanting death to both leaders
Ivorian women surround French Embassy and protest agreement
Citizens gather around French Embassy to protest peace agreement with rebels
Citizens march in funerl procession of popular actor/entertainer allegedly murdered by police
Youths protest concessions government made to rebels
Youths attack police after death of young Muslim student
Youths attack military camp to secure release of detainees
Citizens attempt protest but are immediately stopped by tear gas fired by police
Group marches to demand that former rebels be disarmed
Youths vandalize rail link to protest plan of linking with Burkina Faso
Citizens attack ex-rebel now serving as communications minister
Students riot, demanding compensation for missed year of classes due to civil war
Citizens riot outside of national television headquarters, protesting ex-rebels in government
Citizens protest appointment process of government, alleging unfair treatment of ex-rebels
Citizens protest inclusion of rebels in government and demand they be ousted
Pro-rebel citizens protest against President and demand his resignation
Newspaper workers strike protesting harassment by militants and civilians and destruction of their property
Citizens attack French military base, demanding they leave so the government can attack rebels again
Police and military clash after policeman killed by military officer
Youths rally and threaten to attack rebels in the north
Unknown attackers seize a TV station and engage in a firefight with the government.
Petroleum workers strike in response to rumors of layoffs
Students occupy Republic of Congo Embassy, demanding unpaid grants
Students attack police after verdict passed on fellow militants
Gunmen attack a village of ethnic Bete in conflicts over land ownership.
Students storm Justice Ministry and attack magistates, protesting appointment of particular judges
Citizens protest President not fully implementing the peace accord
Youths gather to show support for President
Citizens gather to demand UN peacekeepers liberate the country from rebels
Citizens protest leak of confidential U.N. report that blamed government for massacre
Ivorian women protest, demanding ex-rebels be disarmed
Citizens protest presence of ex-rebels in government and show support for President
Citizens call for resignation of President in rebel-held city
Citizens attack French Embassy, protesting French handling of uprising
A group of students attacks opposition leader and kidnaps high-ranking official, later killing him
Citizens attack French military base after rumor that French peacekeepers were behind bank robbing
Citizens attack UN peacekeepers, protesting disarmament of rebel fighters
Twelve cocoa unions strike, demanding prices of cocoa beans be raised
Prisoners riot over water shortages and attack prison guards, killing one
Citizens attack and burn Rally for Republicans headquarters after air raid on rebels
Citizens riot and attack French troops after French air strike kills civilians. Violence ceases on the last day and becomes a march
Ivorian and Burkinabe farmers clash, killing 6
Citizens protest lack of water, power and phone services for over a week and demand President's resignation
A gang kills villagers over a land dispute.
Supporters of the President clash with police
Government forces attack rebels in northern Cote d'Ivoire
Bus drivers protest police behavior of smashing bus windows if not paid bribes
Public transport workers strike, protesting police racketeeridng
Forest guards torture and kill seven citizens illegally occupying forest
Citizens hold opposing demonstrations, calling both the removal and continued presence of French troops
Gunmen attack UN outpost
Ethnic clashes between Ivorians and minority group 14 dead
Ethnic groups clash
Unidentified gunmen attack security post, killing 4
Gunmen clash with military during attempted looting
Citizens protest President's UN-backed mandate
Citizens rally in support of President
Unknown assailants attack a police base.
Gunmen attack military barracks
Citizens protest UN proposal that parliamentary term not be extended
Gunmen attack hospital, killing 11 and kidnapping 4
Ivorian soldiers clash with UN peacekeepers, injuring 54
Ethnic clashes erupt, injuring 3
Supporters of President protest new identification program, claiming rebels will distort it
Students attack police leading up to elections
Citizens protest foul stench in main city after residue from gasoline shipment dumped
Youths attack health minister after hundreds of people poisoned due to toxic waste
Disgruntled soldiers briefly block roads in Abidjan, protesting lack of supplies
Angry over plans to store toxc waste in city, citizens block truck from entering
Citizens demand President step down
Cocoa farmers strike, demanding decreases in export taxes
Presidential supporters attack UN vehicles
Citizens clash with police during protest over toxic waste storage
Unknown attackers kill villagers in an incident blamed on economic and ethnic problems.
Citizens clash during anti-Presidential protest
Victims of toxic waste stage hunger strike, demanding promsied compensation
Teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Students loot human rights league headquarters because of their support of teachers' strike
Citizens demand higher compensation for toxic wase victims
Unknown attackers fire at the PM's plane.  The PM is unharmed, but several people are killed.
Students clash with police during protest demanding compensation for police actions during previous protest
Former president holds rally denouncing current president
Gunmen attack former rebels during disarmament
Citizens protest high food prices and clash with police
Former rebels protest delays in payment of demobilisation package
Workers strike after increase in gas prices
Rival ethnic groups clash as Lobi seek to avenge the death of one of their own
Riot erupts after two men accused of abducting children
Lawyers strike over working conditions and wages
Unknown assailants attack a rebel arms depot and try to liberate prisoners.
Teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Dispute over a woman between two students results in widespread clashes
Doctors strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens trample and attack each other to gain access to a football game
Mob forms and attacks Lebanese student alleged to have killed Ivorian youth
Clerks responsible for distributing identity cards strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens protest a pro-government line taken by state television prior to elections.
Citizens march, storm local offices and courthouses, and torch cars belonging to government officials prior to an election.
Street sweepers strike, demanding unpaid wages.
Police forcibly clear an anti-French area of the capital ahead of an African Development Bank summit.
Opposition supporters protest election fraud.
Ruling party supporters attack opposition supporters.
Citizens march in support of the elections.
Citizens clash with police during a protest over a mandated curfew.
Police kill four people at an office of the opposition.
Youths protest after election results were announced.
Opposition supporters march and are attacked by police.
Suspected soldiers attack the UN compound.
Soldiers and police attack opposition supporters.
Opposition supporters strike to pressure Gbagbo to step down.
Citizens protest outside the Nigerian Embassy over fears of international intervention.
A mob attacked a UN peacekeeping convoy.
Ethnic fighting erupts between rival ethnic groups.
Security forces raid the headquarters of a party allied with Ouattara.
Security forces cordon off a large section of a neighborhood and kill supporters of opposition candidate Ouattara.  Protesters march in retaliation, and attack police with rockets.
A pro-Gbagbo mob attacks UN peacekeepers.
Security forces open fire in a pro-Ouattara neighborhood, killing 1.
Residents of a pro-Ouattara neighborhood ransack police stations to protest abuses by security forces.  They clash with those same security forces, leaving 1 dead.
Security forces open fire on a protest-march consisting of several hundred supporters of Ouattara.
Troops enter opposition neighborhoods, throwing grenades, firing guns, and attacking the population with rockets.  The fighting escalates into an outright battle between the two factions.
Fierce fighting erupts across the country between forces loyal to incumbent president Gbagbo and his challenger, Ouattara.
A youth militia allied to Gbagbo kidnaps two UN employees.
A women's march is organized, calling for the downfall of Gbagbo.  Police forces open fire with heavy machine guns, killing 7.
Youth gangs, aided by police, ransack the homes of pro-Outtara officials.
Civil war.  Rebel movements advance from the north and west toward Abidjan to remove President Gbagbo.
Thousands of women march to the funeral for those killed at last week's protest.  The army retaliates several hours later by killing four people.
Civil servants fail to return to work after the end of the civil war.
The new army and a former warlord ally (Ibrahim Coulibaly) clash.
The army clashes with the remnants of Gbagbo's forces.
Militia loyal to the deposed president kill civilians as they flee Abidjan to Liberia.  Most of the civilians are targeted for their ethnicity.
Militia loyal to the deposed president kill civilians as they flee Abidjan to Liberia.  Most of the civilians are targeted for their ethnicity.
Militia loyal to the deposed president kill civilians as they flee Abidjan to Liberia.  Most of the civilians are targeted for their ethnicity.
Ouattara's military forces open fire on refugees the day after his inauguration.
During July, 26 people are killed by forces loyal to Ouattara.  Most the dead were targeted for their ethnicity and their support for Gbagbo.
Pro-Gbagbo fighters in Liberia cross the border and massacre civilians.
Ethnic clashes between supporters of Gbagbo and Ouattara.
Ethnic clashes between supporters of Gbagbo and Ouattara.
A militia attack occurs during the run-up to legislative elections.
Armed youths attempt to overrun a military camp.
Ethnic clashes erupt between Abidji and Malinke.
Ethnic clashes erupt between Abidji and Malinke.
Demonstration by Gbagbo's IPF attacked by Ouattara supporters. Police and UN troops involved in quelling the ensuing riot.
Attacks by Ouattara-aligned militia fighters against civilians.
Attacks by pro-Gbagbo fighters against civilians. Death toll revised by UNOCHA.
Attacks by pro-Gbagbo fighters against UN Peacekeepers from Niger and civilians.
Attacks by pro-Gbagbo fighters against UN Peacekeepers from Niger and civilians.
Attacks by pro-Gbagbo fighters against UN Peacekeepers from Niger and civilians.
Attacks by pro-Gbagbo fighters against UN Peacekeepers from Niger and civilians.
Robbery escalates into clashes between youths and the raiding of a UN refugee/IDP camp.
Coordinated attacks by pro-Gbagbo forces against police stations and a military base.
Coordinated attacks by pro-Gbagbo forces against police stations and a military base.
Coordinated attacks by pro-Gbagbo forces against police stations and a military base.
Coordinated attacks by pro-Gbagbo forces against police stations and a military base.
Attacks by pro-Gbagbo fighters against Army checkpoints.
Attacks by pro-Gbagbo fighters against Army checkpoints.
Attacks by pro-Gbagbo fighters against an Army base and a police station.
Raid by Ouattara supporters against FPI headquarters. No deaths, several injured, property damaged.
Raid by Ouattara supporters against FPI headquarters coordinated with arson attack against opposition newspaper.
Attack on army checkpoint results in deaths of one soldier and five assailants.
Newspapers loyal to Gbagbo stage three day publication strike to protest Aug. 25 attack on Cyclone Group headquarters.
Gunmen attack a border checkpoint along the Ghanaian border and three police stations.
Gunmen attack a border checkpoint along the Ghanaian border and three police stations.
Pirates take a Greek oil tanker off Abidjan, later released in Nigerian waters.
Attack on power plant and police station results in two deaths.
Attack on power plant and police station results in two deaths.
Street peddlers attack police officers after officers attempt to disperse them using tear gas.
Gunmen attack an army checkpoint.
Attacks on transgendered prostitutes by military members.
Gunmen attack a police barracks and an army base.
Gunmen attack a police barracks and an army base.
A crowd stampeded after leaving a New Year's fireworks show because barricades stopped them from moving along a main street, killing 61 people
Pirates seized control of a fuel-laden tanker in the Abidjan port, and released the vessel on 1/22 after making off with about $5 million in cargo
Pirates hijacked a French tanker and held 17 crew members hostage and released the sailors on 2/6
Hundreds of supporters of former president Gbagbo protested to demand his release from ICC custody, and police fired tear gas and arrested 16
Several dozen men from Liberia attacked a village, and 7 people were killed and houses were burned and looted
An armed militia attacked a village, but there were no casualties, three assailants were arrested and weapons were seized
Unidentified gunmen attacked a village and set it ablaze, and soldiers responded to the attack, killing several
Hundreds of students demonstrated against overcrowded classrooms and empty libraries as Higher Education Minister Bacongo visited their campus, they threw rocks and police fired tear gas
One player was killed and 23 were injured after a coach carrying second division football team ES Bafing was attacked by armed bandits
Soldiers completely razed the town of Baleko-Niegre to preserve Ivory Coast's woodland from illegal exploitation by people after the people leaving there were forced to evacuate
About 300 people protested over a delay on whether former President Gbagbo will be put on trial at the ICC
Gunmen attacked a convoy carrying the head of a national commission that is trying to convince ex-combatants to disarm, killing one soldier
An armed gang that had been ambushing vehicles attacked Ivorian security forces and two gendarmes were killed
An armed gang that had been ambushing vehicles killed a policeman
After days of anti-gay protests, a prominent gay rights organization is stormed and ransacked by 200 angry protesters.
A raid launched from Liberia leaves 4 dead.
After a campus police officer abuses a student, many students engage in rioting which leaves 20 officers injured.
A woman was attacked by a taxi driver and accomplice in what may have been a robbery. She later died from her wounds.
15 violent attacks by armed gangs over the course of several months leaves 4 dead and more than 20 wounded.
Ivorian soldiers protest nationwide over failure to receive promised bonuses. Several hundred storm a TV station but do not ransack it.
Ivorian soldiers protest nationwide over failure to receive promised bonuses. Several hundred storm a TV station but do not ransack it.
Ivorian soldiers protest nationwide over failure to receive promised bonuses. Several hundred storm a TV station but do not ransack it.
Ivorian soldiers protest nationwide over failure to receive promised bonuses. Several hundred storm a TV station but do not ransack it.
Ivorian soldiers protest nationwide over failure to receive promised bonuses. Several hundred storm a TV station but do not ransack it.
Ivorian soldiers protest nationwide over failure to receive promised bonuses. Several hundred storm a TV station but do not ransack it.
Demonstrators gather outside the Prime Minister's house to protest the ban on plastic bags which are commonly used for water.
480 prisoners nationwide hold a hunger strike in protest of their continued detention following the political unrest of 2010.
480 prisoners nationwide hold a hunger strike in protest of their continued detention following the political unrest of 2010.
Unknown attackers attacked army positions in the villages of Dahyoke and Grabo near the Liberian border. Two soldiers and one attacker were killed. 
Unknown attackers attacked army positions in the villages of Dahyoke and Grabo near the Liberian border. Two soldiers and one attacker were killed. 
Opponents and supporters of former first lady Simone Gbagbo protested each other outside of a courtroom, where she was tried on charges of underming state security following the 2010 presidential elections, which sparked five months of violence. 
Teachers striked demanding the government to allow an increase in their salaries, which have been frozen since 1980s. 
Teachers striked over deducations from their salaries. 
One person was killed as protesters torched vehicles and clashed with police in several towns a day after the release of the official list of 10 contenders running in the October 25 presidential election, including incumbent Alassane Ouattara. Opposition groups urged anti-Ouattara marches on the grounds that both of his parents were not Ivorian.
One person was killed as protesters torched vehicles and clashed with police in several towns a day after the release of the official list of 10 contenders running in the October 25 presidential election, including incumbent Alassane Ouattara. Opposition groups urged anti-Ouattara marches on the grounds that both of his parents were not Ivorian.
One person was killed as protesters torched vehicles and clashed with police in several towns a day after the release of the official list of 10 contenders running in the October 25 presidential election, including incumbent Alassane Ouattara. Opposition groups urged anti-Ouattara marches on the grounds that both of his parents were not Ivorian.
One person was killed as protesters torched vehicles and clashed with police in several towns a day after the release of the official list of 10 contenders running in the October 25 presidential election, including incumbent Alassane Ouattara. Opposition groups urged anti-Ouattara marches on the grounds that both of his parents were not Ivorian.
Opposition was dispersed by tear gas when they attempted to gather for a demonstration, but were met by riot police.
Unknown gunmen attacked several army positions near the town of Grabo. 6 soldiers and 4 attackers were killed. 
Teaching staff strike demanding raise in salaries
Citizens protest demanding independent election commission
Citizens protest demanding transitional government
Young men attack and burn several polling stations and stab six to death.
Rebel soldiers riot and attack the President's palace demanding higher salaries
Citizens refuse orders to evacuate their homes.  Police raid neighborhood, killing seven.
Opposing political supporters riot as elections draw near, killing four.
Citizens protest results of election, and police disperse with tear gas, arresting several.
Healhcare workers strike, demanding better benefits
Citizens attack polling stations nationwide and clash with police
Political march in support of opposition dispersed by police
2000 Guinea Government
A UN refugee agency employee is killed in a raid.
Citizens protest amending constitution to allow for longer presidential terms for several months, many of which are beaten by police
Students protest lack of teachers and are repressed by police using tear gas and eventually firing into the crowd
Teachers strike demanding higher wages
Armed men attack a guard post.
Citizens protest increases in price of fuel,
Teachers strike demanding higher wages
Students riot, looting rice stores and fighting with police
Students protest school's living conditions
protesters violently broken up by security forces during peaceful march
Citizens riot over prices of electricity, and police open fire.
Citizens protest non-payment to Russian mine
Students protest lack of teachers, and police fire into crowd
Citizens protest establishment of town council in opposition to election results
Citizens protest high cost of living
Students storm electric company after power goes out in the middle of a final exam
Citizens strike over high cost of living
Guinean-Lebanese citizens protest Israeli offensive on Lebanon
Miner's wives clash with police while protesting decreased benefits
Citizens strike, calling for resignation of President
Citizens strike, calling for resignation of President
Armed men abduct the head of the Guinea branch of French oil company Total and then demand a ransom.  He is released soon after.
Traders attack police accused of beating and raping a young girl
Soldiers riot, demanding higher wages.
Student demonstration violently dispersed by police
Students riot, protesting high costs of living and are violently dispersed by police
Lawyers strike, protesting illegal detention of other attorneys
Citizens riot in response to reports of government official firings
Soldiers riot, protesting firing of prime minister
Police strike, demanding higher wages and take senior police officials hostage
Doctors strike, protesting their comparatively lower civil servant status
Students clash with police during protest over electricity prices
Students block railways used for bauxite, protesting poor living conditions
Citizens protest high fuel prices and clash with police
Youths protest economic sanctions imposed on Guinea
Lawyers strike, protesting military attack on attorney after he failed to yield in traffic
Lawyers and judges strike, protesting military junta's establishment of separate courts
Ghana ambassador is kidnapped, beaten and robbed by soldiers
Group stages anti-junta rally, and police fire tear gas
Group stages anti-junta rally
Citizens march in support of opposition candidate and demand democratic elections
Citizens protest threatened sanctions if junta ruler runs in elections
Citizens march against military ruler
Citizens hold one-day stay-at-home strike as junta leader is scheduled to parade through town
Citizens hold rally to protest junta leader, and police open fire into the stadium
Soldiers attack youths the day after protest massacre
Citizens hold anti-government rally and display victims of protest massacre
Citizens organize 'town on strike' day to protest massacre
Citizens strike, protesting massacre of citizens at the hands of soldiers
Soldiers kidnap influential banker and force him to turn over his fortune
Citizens strike, marking the one-month anniversary of the protest massacre
Citizens go on 5-day hunger strike to mark massacre, but are arrested and forced to eat by soldiers
Soldiers open fire on President, wounding him and rendering him unable to speak for several days
Citizens hold a pro-junta protest at the international airport.
A Christian woman hits a Muslim man with her shoe, prompting religious and ethnic clashes.
Villagers attack soldiers over alleged theft, prompting clashes and arrests.
Lawyers strike, protesting executive interference in trials.
Rival party supporters clash before elections.
Thousands of Toure supporters rally after he misses the cut for the run-off.
Rival party supporters clash supporters clash.
Citizens protest against alleged fraud and clash with rival party supporters.
Rival ethnic groups clash amid stalled election results.
Citizens protest presidential election proceedings and attack rival party supporters.
Students riot to protest an incident of alleged negligence in which a student died in a hospital.  Police use tear gas and clubs to break up the protest.
An opposition political party stages protests.  Police open fire.
Clashes are sparked by witch hunts and lynchings; the violence sets the indigenous Kpeles against ethnic Malinkes.
Military forces loyal to ousted dictator Moussa Camara and army chief Sekouba Konata fire rockets on the president's home in an unsuccessful coup-attempt.  A gun battle occurs in which one of the president's security detail is killed.
Clashes erupt when regional authorities try to expropriate mineral rich land for the Guinean palm oil and rubber company (Soguipah).
An opposition march is violently dispersed by paramilitary police.
Port workers strike against the port management company Bollore, demanding better working conditions.
Employees in Guinea's largest bauxite mining company strike for pay raises.
Hundreds of protesters, mostly students, demonstrated against the cutting of electricity in Port Kamsar.  Some threw stones, and the army was called in to control the protest.  One protester was killed by a gunshot wound while at least 30 others were injured.
Many were injured after police repressed a protest against the cutting of power durign the Cup of Nations football match between Mali and Guinea.
At least 13 were injured as protesters clashed with security force during a protest against the power outage during an African Cup of Nations football match.
Opposition leaders organized a rally to call for cleam elections.  Police broke up the demonstration with tear gas, arresting dozens.
Opposition supporters attacked the HQ of the ruling party, claiming it was a response to aggression from ruling party supporters.  Supporters of the ruling Rally for the Guinean People then attacked the building of the Party of Hope for National Development.
Employees of the Russian-owned Friguia refinery went on strike to demand higher pay.  The union has also demanded that the government cancel Rusal's ownership of the refinery.
Police fired tear gas and beat several women protesting against alledged election corruption, leaving 20 of the 200 demonstrators injured.
Thousands of opposition protesters gathered to demonstrate against the delay in legislative polls.  Police fired tear gas and beat several protesters, leaving at least 41 injured.
Over 200 data entry operators gathered outside the electoral commission building to demand payment of unpaid salaries, amounting to about 400 euros per person.  Police fired tear gas and used truncheons to break up the crowd
Villagers vandilised facilities of Brazilian mining company Vale to protest its hiring of outside ethnic groups.  Security forces fired on the villagers, killing 5.  Dozens were injured and 30 arrested.  Villagers retaliated, killing two soldiers.
Demonstrators marched in Siguiri, setting up barricades and burning tires to protest rising crime.  Security forces fired on the crowd, killing one.  Demonstrators then attacked the military camp.
Police fired tear gas on a crowd of about 100 demonstrators, protesting electricity and water outages.
Security forces clashed with opposition protesters after preventing a protest against the continuing delays in legislative elections.  In the clash about 27 protesters were arrested, and several protester and 20 paramilitary police officers were injured.  Security forces also fired on a car holding three top opposition leaders.
In an authorized protest, opposition leaders lead thousands of people in a demonstration to demand free and fair elections.  Protesters also demonstrated against Waymark, the company brought in by the government to redo election lists.  Police fired tear gas to disperse the crowd, but no injuries were reported.
Malinke government supporters and Peul opponents clashed in Conakry the day after a major opposition protest.  At least 46 people, including 13 police officers and gendarmes were lightly wounded and one was killed.
Police clashed with youths who were part of a funeral procession for two opposition supporters.  Several people were wounded.
Hundred of students marched to protest the firing of teacher Mariama Tata Diallo, who reportedly criticized the Guinean government in class.  Police fired tear gas to break up the protest.
Ethnic Kissien staged a protest to demand the resignation of a local Malinke official.  The protest turned into an ethnic clash, leaving two dead from gunshot wounds.  Three more were killed when the army fired on the protesters.  Over 100 people were injured, and several women were raped by soldiers.
Thousands of protesters, organized by the opposition, demonstrated to call for free and fair legislative elections and to denounce President Alpha Conde
Youths erected barricades, burned tires, and ransacked a building while chanting slogans against President Conde and threw stones at cars and police, who responded by firing tear gas and arresting dozens
Demonstrators massed in front of the ruling party headquarters to protest against a protester's arrest and began to throw rocks and police fired tear gas and two people were killed, including a police officer
Soldiers opened fire at point-blank range and killed a young boy and wounded 12 others
Automobile spare parts salesmen clashed with food sellers
Two private radio stations were attacked, one was shot at when the leader of the opposition Liberal Bloc was being interviewed
Men in uniform and civilians started looting and two people were killed and seven were wounded
Anti-government protests were broken up by police who fired tear gas
Anti-government protests were broken up by police who fired tear gas
Protesters broke away from a funeral procession and hurled rocks at police and military officers guarding the President's party headquarters building and tear gas was fired at the crowd
 decision to announce a new election date and clashed with police who fired tear gas
 government decision to hold legislative elections on June 30 and security forces killed one person
Thousands protested a decree that sets June 30 as the date for elections and police fired tear gas and water cannon, with at least 20 people being injured and one killed
Two or three people were gunned down by soldiers on motorbikes
Thousands of mourners gathered at the funerals of opposition activists killed in protests, chanting anti-government slogans and demanding justice
Opposition supporters clashed with police, and 15 people were injured, and between 1 and 6 people were killed
Youths set up barricades of burning tires to block roads and as traffic ground to a halt, security forces were deployed to dismantle the barricades and fighting broke out
Clashes erupted between police and opposition supporters when police raided several neighbourhoods seen as pro-opposition, with six killed and many wounded
A demonstration was held by supporters of former prime minister Diallo, a key opposition leader, and three activists were shot and nine others were wounded by police
At least 95 people were killed and homes, churches and mosques were destroyed after clashes broke out between the Konianke and Guerze tribes after Guerze petrol station guards killed 2 people from the Konianke tribe
At least 95 people were killed and homes, churches and mosques were destroyed after clashes broke out between the Konianke and Guerze tribes after Guerze petrol station guards killed 2 people from the Konianke tribe
President Conde was jeered by hundreds of angry youths who accused him of doing nothing for the development of his region of origin
A radio station was ransacked by pro-government demonstrators for reporting on protests against President Alpha Conde
Pro-government and opposition supporters clashed with sticks and stones after election campaign banners were posted by party activists
Up to 20 people were injured when government and opposition supporters clashed over a period of several days
Hundreds of teenage activists from the Union of Democratic Forces protested and pelted police with rocks and a trainee policemen was shot dead and two were injured
Angry voters ransacked a polling station after election workers failed to show up more than two hours after the scheduled starting time
Opposition supporters and government supporters demonstrated, and police fired tear gas
About 30 opposition supporters staged a demonstration against alleged irregularities during the country's legislative elections
 marched and threw rocks to protest a ruling handing elections to the president's party and police fired tear gas
A mob of listeners launched a search for armed men who tried to kidnap radio station director Mandian Sidibe, which turned into a protest and police fired tear gas and opened fire, killing a protester
A general strike called over alleged election fraud turned violent, and policemen shot and killed a striker and wounded others
A police patrol arrested a well-known local footballer named Balla Conde, beat him and left him to die in the street
Thousands of demonstrators protested against the death of a youth that was beaten by police and hundreds ransacked a police station, with two people killed
Thousands of residents (mainly women and young people) rioting after an electrical power outage, one of a series of recurring outages. Police responded with tear gas, rubber bullets and batons as rioters threw stone, burned tires and put up barricades. At least 33 injured and two killed (one police and one rioter)
Hundreds of youths protesting killing by police of teenager accused of possessing drugs; youths armed with sticks, clubs and knives set fire to police station and two local government building, opened gates of prison freeing at least 20 inmates
Students accusing doctors of negligence in case of classmate who was hospitalized with an injury and doctors demanded payment sum (300 euros) the family could not pay so students paid, but patient died on operating table. On first day of riot students damaged hospital and cars and injured three doctors by throwing stones; on second day riot police prevented demonstration with tear gas and batons.
A crowd attacked an MSF Ebola treatment center after rumors spread that Ebola was imported into Guinea, some young people threw rocks at aid workers; MSF evacuated aid workers from town.
Angry mob burned down headquarters of Rainbow party after associate of a newly elected official was attacked by followers of ruling party
Opposition pulled out of parliament and threatened street demonstrations, accusing government of refusing to dialogue with political class and failing to uphold agreement to hold elections within first four months of 2014
Market stall owners attacked team of health workers sent without notice to spray their market with disinfectant, possibly related to suspicions of Ebola being imported, at least 55 wounded incl. at least 27 law enforcement; curfew imposed after two days of protests
Villagers attacked health education outreach team with rocks and knives when they arrived in village for Ebola prevention education, wounding at least 21; seven bodies found two days later in primary school septic tank; presumed to be related to conspiracy theory about Ebola being imported to kill people in Guinea; 27 suspects later arrested
Family members of the dead threw rocks at burial team, vandalized cars, and threw rocks at regional health office; one Red Cross worker injured
Dozens of youths protested new MSF Ebola treatment center, halting launch of construction; demonstration with chanting slogans escalated to property damage; likely related to conspiracy theory about Ebola
Protesters called for Alpha Conde to be exluded from returning to presidential polls. 
Protesters killed the three police and their driver because villagers were convinced the victims were infected with ebola. 
Okenve was arrested for distributing leaflets calling for a boycott of the African Cup of Nations since there are so many poor people. They believe it is a misallocation of funds. 
Diallo, a midfielder for the Guinean soccer team, was left off the squad for the African Cup.
Soccer fans had trouble getting into African Cup of Nations stadiums, resuling in riots. 
Soccer fans threw rocks at police outside the African Cup of Nations for unspecified reasons, but it may have to do with the difficuty getting into stadiums. 
There are no known reasons for this clash 
Protesters called for Alpha Conde to be exluded from returning to presidential polls. 
Police used tear gas on fans who wre protesting the restults of a game.
Home team fans began throwing bottles aftr their team lost the semifinal game at the African Cup of Nations.
Protesters put up barricades, tires, and overturned trash bins to protest the arrest of an imam who led funeral prayers for a reported Ebola victim and who was accused of attacking an Ebola outreach worker. 
Opposition leaders withdrew their lawmakers from parliament in protest over the timetable for the presidential elections. 
Opposition supporters began violent riots in which one person was killed and several were injured. 
Camara supporters were calling for his return from exile in Burkina Faso. 
Hundreds of women have gone on hunger strike demanding the return of Camara. 
Supporters of different presidential nominees threw stones at each other to display atheir dislike of rival candinates. 
Supporters of different presidential nominees threw stones at each other to display atheir dislike of rival candinates. 
Supporters of different presidential nominees threw stones at each other to display atheir dislike of rival candinates. 
Women were protesting a rape video on social media and the violence against women in Guinea. 
Prisoners rioted against the prison governor because he was disliked. 
At least 12 people were injured here Monday as supporters of Burkina Faso President Blaise Compaore attacked opposition demonstrators calling for a national political conference, witnesses and hospital sources said.
Isolated gangs of youths looted two supermarkets in the centre of the Burkina Faso capital on Tuesday after security forces had used tear-gas to break up a demonstration by several thousand people.
He was speaking at a mass meeting of about 10,000 people in Ouagadougou called by the CFD and held on the vast esplanade of Revolution Square in the centre of the capital.
Early Tuesday, Ouagadougou University students began a five-day strike.
A Burkinabe opposition leader was assassinated on Tuesday and another seriously hurt, a week after helping organize a massive boycott of presidential elections in which incumbent Blaise Compaore was sole candidate.
Tuareg rebels attack a passenger convoy.
Police killed two schoolchildren at Garango in Burkina Faso when a protest by pupils over their teachers' refusal to let them sit examinations turned violent, a government statement said Wednesday.
Air traffic controllers from 15 African countries went on strike Tuesday to win better pay and a raise in status, their federation said.
Four student leaders arrested for spearheading strikes were released Sunday, national radio reported, citing Burkina Faso's higher education minister Maurice Melegue Traore.
Doctors and nurses began a 10-day nationwide strike Saturday, protesting the firings and demotions of union leaders who had organized a partial work stoppage.
Thousands of people took to the streets of this dusty capital city Tuesday to protest the death of a prominent journalist.
Thousands of people took to the streets of this dusty capital city Tuesday to protest the death of a prominent journalist.
Police fired tear gas Sunday morning into the courtyard of this city's Roman Catholic cathedral, scattering protesters who were demanding the government investigate the death of a prominent journalist.
Electrical workers turned off the lights while teachers and doctors walked off the job Friday in separate protests over the deaths of a journalist and a power company employee.
Electrical workers turned off the lights while teachers and doctors walked off the job Friday in separate protests over the deaths of a journalist and a power company employee.
At least 3,000 protesters began a march against impunity in Burkina Faso's capital on Saturday, according to organisers, while security forces said about 1,000 people were taking part.
Security forces in Burkina Faso arrested several students Monday in a raid on the University of Ouagadougou residences that followed raucous protests over the murder of a popular journalist.
On Thursday, a coalition of human rights activists, opposition parties and journalists calling for his release launched a general strike, which paralysed Koudougou.
On Thursday, a coalition of human rights activists, opposition parties and journalists calling for his release launched a general strike, which paralysed Koudougou.
On Thursday, a coalition of human rights activists, opposition parties and journalists calling for his release launched a general strike, which paralysed Koudougou.
Planes were grounded, hospitals were without doctors and telephones and power were cut Tuesday as tens of thousands in Burkina Faso went on strike to protest low wages and alleged state human rights abuses.
Hundreds of soldiers demanding back wages seized control of the main military barracks in this capital city Thursday morning and surrounded the defense ministry.
Workers demanding higher wages in Burkina Faso began a 48-hour strike Wednesday, slowing down postal and health services in the capital and the provinces.
Health workers launched a seven-day strike Monday in Burkina Faso to demand rises in housing allowances and free emergency care for patients.
Some 10,000 people demonstrated in Burkina Faso's capital on Monday to commemorate the assassination a year ago of Norbert Zongo, a journalist whose death unleashed a wave of unrest.
Meanwhile, in an act of solidarity, the General Confederation of Burkinabe Workers (CGT-B), launched a two-day strike in the west African country on Monday.
Members of rival student unions in Burkina Faso's capital used batons and bludgeons against each another during clashes Wednesday at the University of Ouagadougou campus, AFP reported.
Students wielding stones and slingshots responded to a general strike order Monday by erecting barricades and bringing traffic in Burkina Faso's capital to a standstill.
His Majesty the Naaba Tigre, a powerful tribal chief of the west African state of Burkina Faso, has unleashed public protest in his home town after ordering one of his subjects to be beaten to death for bad-mouthing him.
His Majesty the Naaba Tigre, a powerful tribal chief of the west African state of Burkina Faso, has unleashed public protest in his home town after ordering one of his subjects to be beaten to death for bad-mouthing him.
Sleeping outdoors next to makeshift cooking fires, some 170 African refugees were camped out Thursday in front of a U.N. agency office in this West African country, from where they were demanding to be granted asylum in North America or Europe.
A four-day general strike began Tuesday in Burkina Faso's capital Ouagadougou to press the government to bring to justice those who killed prominent journalist Norbert Zongo nearly two years ago.
Some 5,000 students and school pupils demonstrated Tuesday against the closure of Burkina Faso's university in Ouagadougou.
Some 5,000 students and school pupils demonstrated Tuesday against the closure of Burkina Faso's university in Ouagadougou.
Police backed by armed militiamen clashed Wednesday with demonstrators commemorating the second anniversary of the unsolved killing of a journalist in this West African country.
Lecturers said they had agreed to halt their protests calling for reforms of the university's administration in return for government agreeing to hold talks on their grievances.
Critics called it a government bid for impunity, and organized a counter National Mourning Day. Hundreds gathered at the cemetery holding the grave of popular journalist Norbert Zongo, whose 1998 killing touched off what has been lasting public
Asking for forgiveness before a 30,000-strong stadium crowd, Burkina Faso's 13-year leader delivered an unprecedented apology for torture and all other crimes committed by his West African nation.
Scores of Burkinabes Thursday attacked Lebanese-owned shops in the capital city of Ouagadougou to protest against supposed charges of smuggling levelled against native traders.
In a show of protest, thousands of people marched in silence Thursday to the grave of a journalist whose death in a car fire three years ago remains unsolved.
Some 2,000 workers staged a protest in the capital to mark May Day, during which they announced they had called a general strike on May 28 and 29.
Nearly 2,000 striking workers took to the streets of Ouagadougou on Thursday demanding higher wages to cope with hardships caused by Burkina Faso's structural adjustment programme.
The announcement came as riot police in the Burkina Faso capital Ouagadougou clashed with some 3,000 people protesting over the treatment being meted out to Burkina Faso nationals in Ivory Coast since the September 19 military uprising there.
Gendarmerie police in Burkina Faso have been holding the leader of the national students' association, Bertrand Meda, and five other students accused of vandalism for three days, police said Monday.
Chanting anti-American slogans, thousands in two west African countries marched Tuesday to protest the U.S.- and British-led war in Iraq.
Stallkeepers in Burkina Faso went on the rampage Friday, incensed over what they see as government plans to hand the city's sprawling central market to commercial interests and protesting police violence.
Bandits attack police after harassing a local village.
One inmate was killed and 102 others escaped on September 29 last year after a jail cell riot to protest a shortage of drinking water in the jail. Many of those inmates have since been recaptured.
Two people were killed and 14 others injured on Saturday in a stampede at the opening of the Fespaco Panafrican film and television festival in the Burkina Faso capital, emergency services said.
Armed highway robbery is such a daily worry to people of Burkina Faso that opposition politicians taking on President Blaise Compaore in an election on Sunday have focussed their campaigns on security.
Around 50 women dressed in black prayed at the grave of a murdered journalist on Sunday to protest the scrapping of a case against a security official who is the sole suspect accused in the killing.
Peasant farmers in the West African state of Burkina Faso launched a protest campaign on Thursday against the economic partnership agreements the European Union is negotiating with 75 of the world's poorest countries.
Firefights between soldiers and police in Burkina Faso's capital killed four people overnight, an official said Thursday.
Two people were killed and four arrested in violence that erupted in eastern Burkina Faso after villagers refused to make traditional gifts to a local chief, a prosecutor said Monday.
Two people were killed and four arrested in violence that erupted in eastern Burkina Faso after villagers refused to make traditional gifts to a local chief, a prosecutor said Monday.
Hundreds of sub-Saharan Africans rallied Monday in Burkina Faso against the abuse of women infected with HIV/AIDS.
More than 100 people have been arrested in Burkina Faso's second city after a protest against rising living costs ended in violent clashes, the interior minister said Thursday.
Several unions in Burkina Faso called for a general strike next month as tens of thousands staged protest marches Saturday against the high cost of living in the west African country.
A general strike over high prices in Ougadougou spread elsewhere in Burkina Faso Wednesday, slowing more public sectors, unions said, while the government insisted, everything was running as normal.
Tens of thousands of protesters took to the streets in several towns in Burkina Faso, one of the world's poorest countries, on Wednesday to protest the rising cost of living as part of a three-day general strike.
At least 14 people have died in the poor West African nation of Burkina Faso after clashes between farmers and shepherds since May 24, the authorities said Monday.
Burkina Faso on Thursday closed the student campus at the university of Ouagadougou, which has been paralysed by a student strike for the past fortnight.
Total employees strike over a sacked employee
Prisoners riot and attempt to escape, prompting the guards to open fire
Citizens strike, protesting a new communal development tax on motorcycles and bicycles.
Citizens protest against new district taxes.
Citizens witness police being rough with a suspect and attack them.
Riots erupt over the death of a jailed student.  Clashes erupt with the police.
Riots erupt over the death of a jailed student.  Clashes erupt with the police.
Students hold rallies and riots across the country to protest the death of a student in jail.  Government buildings are torched and prisoners are set free.
Troops from two camps in the capital fire into the air and ransack shops to protest a court judgment punishing fellow soldiers for a sex scandal.  The soldiers are set free in response.
Soldiers fire into the air and demand the release of a comrade jailed for the rape of a teenage girl.  The convict is released after a five hour protest.  The soldiers then block access to the town, starting a mutiny.
Tens of thousands march against the president and the high cost of living.
Soldiers mutiny in the capital over unpaid housing allowances; they are joined by dozens of the presidential guard.  Mutiny, looting, and protest spreads across the country, with students staging several violent protests.  Protesters claim an Arab Spring connection.
Violence broke out when the Liliou group refused to accept an Akonga as the new village chief.  Over 100 houses were burned and one Akonga and nine Liliou were killed.
3,000 demonstrators marched on Ouagadougou, while others staged protests in other urban areas against recent price hikes.
3,000 demonstrators marched on Ouagadougou, while others staged protests in other urban areas against recent price hikes.
Clashes broke out between farmers and herders when a Fula herdsman refused to compensate a Bissa farmer after his herd destroyed his crops
Thousands of demonstrators protested against the creation of a senate, which they say will extend the rule of President Blaise Compaore and police fired tear gas
Thousands of demonstrators protested against the creation of a senate, which they say will extend the rule of President Blaise Compaore and police fired tear gas
Thousands of followers of opposition leader Zephirin Diabre protested around the country against rising costs for basic goods like rice and sugar
Thousands of protesters marched decrying a perceived attempt by the president to extend his hold on power through the creation of a new Senate
Thousands of protesters marched decrying a perceived attempt by the president to extend his hold on power through the creation of a new Senate
Students set more than a dozen cars on fire after university officials told the students to vacate their dormitories at the end of July and they refused and nearly 50 people were arrested
More than 10,000 gather to protest plans to change the constitution to allow the president to run for another term.
Around 35,000 gather in a stadium to protest the president's plans to run for another term.
Close to 100,000 opposition protesters march against president Compaore's plans to run for another term.
Hundreds build barricades and burned tires after a constitutional referendum was announced. Other opposition groups, women, trade unions and civil society groups join in large organized protests. Hundreds battle police after a rally. Trade unions hold a general strike. protesters burn down parliament. Army takes power dissolving the government. protesters denounce military takeover.
The newly appointed culture ministry draws a small protest for his role as a prosecutor in a contentious murder case years before.
Around 300 people place brooms on the grave of former Burkina Faso leader Thomas Sankara in a symbolic act calling for an investigation to be reopened into his murder.
Several thousand people protested in Ouagadougou to demand the dissolution of the Presidential Security Regimen, criticised for its heavy-handed response to demonstrations that led to the ouster of president Blaise Compaore in October 2014. 
Locals from villages near the Tambao mine staged a protest against the mining company, accusing it of not living up to its promise of building a road in the region.
Truck drivers, demanding better pay and working conditions, striked to stop oil supplies from reaching power stations, causing outages across the country.
Unknown attackers kidnapped a Romanian security officer working at a mine in northern Burkina Faso and fled with him towards the border with Mali.
Islamic militants attacked Christians in Oursi near the border with Mali, injuring 2 people, including a police officer.
The Presidential Security Regimen, loyal to ousted leader Blaise Compaore, kidnapped the interim president Michel Kafando and interim prime minister Isaac Zida a couple weeks before a national election, announcing a coup.
protesters protested against the kidnapping of the interim president and prime minister by the Presidential Security Regimen across the country. In the capital, protesters  were disapearsed by gunshots from the troops.
protesters protested against the kidnapping of the interim president and prime minister by the Presidential Security Regimen across the country. In the capital, protesters  were disapearsed by gunshots from the troops.
protesters protested against the kidnapping of the interim president and prime minister by the Presidential Security Regimen across the country. In the capital, protesters  were disapearsed by gunshots from the troops.
Unions went on strike to protest the coup by the Presidential Security Regimen.
Women protested the Presidential Security Regimen holding spatulas and brooms - symbols of the "Civic Broom" movement at the forefront of 2014 anti-Compaore protests.
Supporters of the coup leader General Gilbert Diendere stormed the hotel hosting the regional mediation talks to end the crisis.
protesters took to the streets to protest a compromise deal reached by regional mediators the previous dayin order to resolve the crisis following a coup by the Presidential Security Regimen.
Unknown attackers attacked a Presidential Security Regimen checkpoint, killling 1 person. The attack was repelled.
The army attacked the Presidential Guard Regimen barracks, who were refusing to disarm following an interim president's order. No deaths were reported.
50 jihadists stormed a police station, killing 3 police officers. 1 attacker was killed.
Jihadist fighters attacked an armoured van transporting money from a gold mine; the driver was killed, but the police accompanying the van fought off the attackers.
1989 Liberia Government
The bodies of 12 descendants of the founders of Liberia were murdered overnight.
Christians march demanding peace.
Citizens peacefully protest the killings of fellow citizens accused of being members of the rival group, United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia
Civilians protest and riot over food prices and the civil war.
Women peacefully protest the planned installation of a government run by rebel warlords.
Civilians respond to rebel attacks by marching to demand peace.
Civilians violently protest the break down of peace talks between rebel groups.
Civilians violently protest the break down of peace talks between rebel groups.
Civilians violently protest the break down of peace talks between rebel groups.
Religious leaders call for a general strike to demand peace.
Teachers strike demanding back pay, food incentives, better working conditions and transportation allowances.
Civilians march against potential EU sanctions against Nigeria.
Rebels attack a civilian refugee camp.
Rebels take control of the National Bank of Liberia to protest appointment of a new governor.
A faction of ULIMO attacks a town.
Rebel groups clash over control.
Rebel group attack UN envoy, sent to aid in the disarmament of the rebel groups.
Rebel militias clash.
Civilians stage a one day stay at home protest over the ongoing fighting.
NPFL attack and take control of Kakata.  Taylor claims the attack was in an effort to protect the citizens and demand political reform.
Clashes between government troops and ULIMO began when police attempt to arrest Johnson on murder charges.
Fighting occurs between the ethnic factions of ULIMO.
Fighting occurs between the ethnic factions of ULIMO.
Clashes between ethnic factions and rebel groups.
Krahn gunmen of the Liberia Peace Council try to assassinate Charles Taylor.
Rebel militias clash.
Ethnic factions of ULIMO clash
Taxi and truck drivers strike over the killing of a taxi driver.
Supporters of Charles Taylor attack Mandingo tribe to protest a rival presidential hopeful.
Political supporters rally to demonstrate their support for presidential candidates.
Political supporters rally to demonstrate their support for presidential candidates.
Political supporters rally to demonstrate their support for presidential candidates.
Political supporters rally to demonstrate their support for presidential candidates.
Armed men attack a Lutheran church and rob it.
Firestone workers strike demanding better work and living conditions.
Firestone workers strike demanding increased pay.
Demobilized soldiers demand government retirement benefits.
Liberian secret police attempt to arrest Johnson in his home, then attack the US Embassy when Johnson enters the embassy.  Soldiers began looting after the conflict at the embassy began.
Forestry workers strike demanding increased pay, transportation allowances and food rations.
Sierra Leone refugees protest their conditions in the refugee camp demanding the UN attempt to end the conflict in Sierra Leone.
Rebel groups based in Guinea attempt to take over Voinjama.
Residents of Voinjama protest in Monrovia to demand better government protection to prevent rebel groups based in Guinea from attacking them.
Rebels based in Guinea kidnap 100 humanitarian workers, and demand gasoline and cash for ransom.
Former civil war fighters riot to demand better living conditions.
Rebels  attempt to take over Kolahun and Voinjama.  Government and rebels clash for several weeks.
Rebels  attempt to take over Kolahun and Voinjama.  Government and rebels clash for several weeks.
Students demonstrate demanding better education facilities.
2000 Liberia Government
Demonstrators march in support of the central government and protesting US and British accusations of supporting Sierra Leone rebels.
Members of the Manos tribe attack Mandingos accusing them of conspiring with Guinea insurgents.
School children march in protest of economic sanction proposed by the international community.
Women march to demand international intervention in the conflict with Guinea and Sierra Leone.
Youths stage a hunger strike demanding dialogue between Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea to end the current conflict.
Nigerians demonstrate outside the Nigerian embassy and business men strike to demand justice for those accused of killing Enakerakp while in police custody.
Students protest the killing of a fellow student by the local police chief.
Residents of Lofa county protest to demand election be postponed due to ongoing conflict in their region.
Members of parliament boycott session to demand payment of 17 months in past due salary.
Teachers strike demanding nine months of salary arrears.
Students protest at the education ministry about a teachers strike.
The Catholic church close schools and hospitals on the anniversary of the killing of five American nuns.  The Catholic church was accused by Johnson of causing the death of the nuns.
Liberians protest asking US to help end international sanctions and the conflict with rebels in the North.
Students protest when state security forces threaten to prevent leading opposition politician from addressing the students and to demand the release of a student activist.
Women demonstrate to demand government and rebel forces lay down their arms.
Women demonstrate outside US Embassy asking for the US to end the civil war and improve living conditions in refugee camps.
Displaced people demonstrate asking for US intervention in the civil war.
Civilians demonstrate to ask for intervention in the civil war.
Civil war veterans demonstrate asking for help to create a unified army when Taylor steps down.
Women march to demand peace throughout the country, not just in Monrovia where peacekeepers have focused.
Women march to demand disarmament.
Former government soldiers riot outside UN disarmament camp demanding immediate compensation for giving up weapons.
MODEL attack civilians in Nimba county in attempt to retake the region.
Members of the rebel group MODEL attack and take over a rubber plantation.
Ivory Coast refugees protest neglect by Embassy officials.
Women march in protest to ritualistic killings, demanding police take action.
Members of MODEL riot and loot in Buchanan.
Members of LURD riot when leaders announce decision to remove Finance Minister Luseni Kamara from office.
Students protest demanding the government pay teachers 18 months of back pay.
LURD members attack and rob civilians due to the delay of the disarmament process.
LURD members riot when told they will not receive immediate payment for disarmament.
Former civil war fighters demonstrate to ask forgiveness for the violence they caused.
Students and teachers protest at the appointment of a new University president claiming he will not understand what they have been through because he has been in exile.
Liberian soccer fans riot after losing to the Senegal team.
Students and parents demonstrate to protest the closure of the Early Learning Foundation School.
Christians and Muslims begin rioting after churches and mosques were burned down overnight.
Former civil war fighters riot on the last day of volunteer disarmament .
Soldiers riot to demand back pay.
Civilians attack the police station after the release of three people suspected of ritualistic killings.
Unknown bombers attack UN peacekeepers.
Former civil war fighters riot demanding rehabilitation benefits promised by the UN for disarmament.
Former civil war fighters riot demanding rehabilitation benefits promised by the UN for disarmament.
Civilians protest looting of train track and other structures for scrap metal sales.
Angry civilians clash with UN police demanding a person accused of engaging in ritualistic killing be brought to immediate justice.
Civil servants strike demanding 18 months of back pay.
Civilians march to show support for presidential candidate and former soccer star, George Weah.
Weah supporters protest preliminary election outcomes that show Johnson-Sirleaf winning.
Widows of soldiers protest demanding pension and benefits payouts.
Rubber plantation workers strike demanding back pay.
Former civil war fighters riot demanding back pay.
Civilians demonstrate to demand a Liberian war crimes tribunal .
Teachers strike over salary arrears.
Soldiers demonstrate demanding insurance, salary arrears, and benefits.
Students protest in support of teachers strike over salary arrears.
Ivory Coast refugees protest demanding better living conditions.
Rubber plantation workers strike demanding the removal of a top manager.
Rubber workers at a state owned plantation strike over back pay.  A senator is taken hostage.  During the situation, the senator grabs two guns and opens fire, wounding several.
Unknown gunmen kill the head of the PPCC.
Christians and Muslims clash when a mosque is attacked.
Angry members of an opposition party attack their own party chairman after disputed primary elections.
Demonstrators clash with police over a disputed presidential election.
Leroy Archie Ponpon, leader of the Movement for the Defense of Gays and Lesbians in Nigeria, had to be escorted from a radio station after hundreds of angry protesters gathered outside.
Liberians killed a Sierra Leonean motorcyclist in the Foya border region and dumped his body across the border.
Around three hundred Sierra Leoneans crossed the border into the Foya region and burned down several structures. The attack was in retalian to the killing of a fellow Sierra Leonean man by Liberians.
Thousands of supporters of the Congress for Democratic Change gathered in Monrovia to protest the violent suppression of a CDC rally a year earlier. The previous protest had been related to election issues.
Hundreds outside a courthouse shouted against the jailing of a journalist on libel charges and clashed with police in an attempt to stop the journalist from being transported to prison
Civilian employees of the United Nations Mission clashed with peacekeepers in a protest over what they claim are unfavorable work conditions and several were manhandled by peacekeepers
Widows demand their deceased husbands' benefits from fighting for the army.
Community members block roads, calling on government to retrieve bodies of Ebola victims.
Community members block roads, calling on government to retrieve bodies of Ebola victims.
Youths attack an Ebola clinic, saying it is a hoax created by the West.
Soldiers open fire and use tear gas on protesting crowds as they evacuate a state official and her family from a quarantined area.
Nurses strike, demanding better pay and protective gear for treating Ebola patients.
A crowd pelts officers with stones, accusing them of murdering a man for breaking curfew.
Healthcare workers strike throughout the week, demanding risk bonuses for treating Ebola.
Healthcare workers strike, demanding danger money for treating Ebola patients.
MSF workers protest in front of the main Ebola treatment facility chanting that they are owed Hazard pay by the government. The protest coincide with MSF plans to hand  over the main task of controlling the Ebola outbreak to the government. 
Hundreds gather at the American embassy in Monrovia to appeal to US and foreign officials to put pressure on the Liberian government to attempt to repatriate Liberian women who were allegedly trafficked to Lebanon.
Protests at GVL, a palm oil plantations, turns violent when protesters throw rocks. protesters had machetes and knives and wounded Deputy Internal Affiars Minister who was trying to negotiate. 
Ebola center workers protest at the Health Ministry demanding hazard pay that they have not received since the county was announced Ebola free. 
Accusations are brought forward by the Press union accusing police brutalizing journalists covering a police conference.  
Teachers protesting outside the presidential palace for unknown reasons. Police are accused of beating journalists covering the protest. 
A security official attacks a woman at a soccer match in the capital. 
Students and teachers demonstrate to demand higher pay and student allowances, demonstration turned violent when police attempted to disperse the protesters.
Women demonstrate demanding Saddam Husein withdraw forces from Kuwait.
Liberian rebels attack Sierra Leonean villages to steal money and food.
Liberian rebels attack Sierra Leonean villages to steal money and food.
1991 Sierra Leone Government
Liberian rebels overtake a village and battle Sierra Leonean troops.
Government forces battle with the National Patriotic Front of Liberia rebels.
Teachers strike demanding increased wages and payment of arrears.
Students strike demanding college fees be returned to the previous years level and to show support for the teachers strike.
Taxi and truck drivers strike over discrimination in distribution of fuel.
Soldiers angry over unpaid salary fire mortars and grenades near the presidential residence, loyalist troops intervened to stop the violence.
Former military officials and civilians stage a coup attempt.
Clashes between Mandingo and Krahn ethnic factions of the United Liberation Movement.
Clashes between Mandingo and Krahn ethnic factions of the United Liberation Movement.
Teachers strike demanding better pay.
Civilians attack rebels.
Civilians peacefully protest demanding an end to the ongoing civil war.
Youths march from Freetown to Hastings demanding peace and to demonstrate to the rebels that they are tired of fighting.
Youths march from Freetown to Hastings demanding peace and to demonstrate to the rebels that they are tired of fighting.
Fuel tanker drivers strike demanding protection from the government against RUF attacks.
Sierra Leone refugees protest demanding the UN provide food and help to end the civil war.
The national soccer team strike over a decrease in daily allowance and reimbursement for travel.
Grenades thrown at the home of the chief election official and national election offices seen as a warning against holding elections scheduled for Feb. 26.
Violent clashes between those opposed to holding elections before a peace settlement is reached with rebels and those supporting scheduled elections.
Sporadiac violence targetted at voters and supporters of elections.
Civilians celebrate the end of military rule after the announcement of Ahmad Tejan Kabbah's presidential election victory.
Commercial drivers strike in protest of rebel attacks on their vehicles.
Women who practice female circumcision demonstrate demanding the government ban organizations that call for an end to the practice.
Women who practice female circumcision demonstrate demanding the government ban organizations that call for an end to the practice.
Clashes between the army and the Kamajor militia began when the militia accused soldiers of stealing from civilians.
Market traders protest a government ban against petty trading.
Youths protest after finding their US visa applications had been dumped in a river.
Students attempt to meet to show disagreement with a government decision to provide a monthly pension to Former President Joseph Momoh.  Riot police prevented the meetings from taking place.
Students protest when a fellow student died at the hospital after participating in a sporting event.
Journalists protest new laws restricting reporting.
Civil servants strike, refusing to work for the military coup leaders.
Teachers strike in response to the military coup and the declining security situation.
Civilians protest Nigerian interference in the ongoing civil war and recent military coup.
Students protest against the military coup
Civilians protest Nigerian intervention in the civil war.
Youths protest Nigerian bombings.
Civilians rally to show support for Britain's High Commissioner who may have assisted in the removal of the military government by transferring arms.
University teachers and lecturers strike demanding payment of salary arrears.
Civilians demonstrate demanding peace and democracy.
Civilians protest and strike against any potential agreement with the rebels that would propose sharing power.
Postal workers strike demanding better pay and benefits.
Demobilized soldiers riot and loot, cause of violence unknown.
Demobilized soldiers riot and loot, cause of violence unknown.
Former soldiers demand payment of salary arrears
Rioting breaks out after an argument between former child soldiers.
Students protest over the slow pace of disarmament by the rebels.
Former rebels attack a UN run disarmament camp demanding payment for giving up arms.
Civilians march on rebel leader Foday Sankoh's house demanding he release UN hostages.
Civilians
Civilians protest the placement of a camp near their town holding former rebels.
Youths riot demanding the curfew be lifted so they could organize against rebel attacks.
Former rebels attack civilians.
Former rebels and pro-government militia clash near the Guinea border.
Pro-government miliita fighters attack rebel strongholds, breaking a 5-day ceasefire.
Students riot over water shortage on university campus.
Pro-government militia fighters attack rebels and citizens.
Former rebels attack a village, killing several.
Nurses strike damanding wage increases.
Former soldiers riot demanding payment for disarmament.
Former soldiers riot demanding payment for disarmament.
Pro-government militia fighters and former rebels clash after the Kamajor discover illegal diamond mining is still occurring.
Nurses and doctors strike damanding wage increases and better work conditions.
Civilians attend a rally to show support for Koroma, the presidential candidate for the All People's Congress.
Civilians rally in support of the the central government and in celebration of peace ahead of elections.  Sporadic violence broke out between President Kabbah supporters and former rebels.
Currency exchangers riot when they found the body of a fellow businessman, Nigerians are accused of the murder.
Liberian rebels kidnap villagers and steal money and food.
Rebels attack a military supply depot to obtain weapons.
Liberian rebels attack and loot a village.
Health care workers strike demanding three years of salary arrears.
Fans of a Nigerian  comedian duo riot when local comedians perform instead.
Liberian refugees attack a school when local students protest over Liberian female school attendance.
Norman supporters protest outside the war crimes courthouse, demanding his release.
Nationwide general strike over increased costs of living and demanding better pay.
Students protest after the exam schedule was changed and demanding payment of stipends.
Opposition supporters riot after learning of the arrest of opposition politician Charles Margai.
Students riot after the arrest of a fellow student.
Students riot after a sport meeting, cause unknown.
Students protest over police treatment of an unlicensed cyclist.
Liberian refugees storm the UNHCD headquarter demanding to be resettled in other countries.
Nurses strike claiming racial and sexual abuse by hospital management.
Woemn rally to push the government to pass legislation protecting them from violence.
Clashes between opposition supporters and the government party during election campaign.
Clashes between opposition supporters and the government party during election campaign.
Clashes between opposition supporters and the government party during election campaign.
Artists rally for non-violence during election campaign.
Human rights supporters and political party supporters march demanding peace during upcoming elections.
Clashes between ruling party and opposition party suporters prior to run-off presidential election.
Clashes between ruling party and opposition party suporters prior to run-off presidential election.
Clashes between ruling party and opposition party suporters prior to run-off presidential election.
Ruling party held a peace rally demanding noon-violence during the presidential run-off election.
Opposition party supporters torch the homes of ruling party activists in post-election violence.
Civilians protest a South African diamond firms plans to dynamite an area near their homes.
Clashes between rival villages largely due to political differences.
Clashes between rival villages largely due to political differences.
University workers strike demanding salary arrears.  The srtike lead to violence when university workers attempted to block students from taking their end of term exams.
Opposition party members storm government party headquarters after comments made on a radio station.
Supporters of the ruling APC attack a mayor of the SLPP.  This triggers a riot between the two factions, which police disrupt with tear gas.  Tensions are ascribed to a local election in Gendema.
Supporters of the ruling APC attack a mayor of the SLPP.  This triggers a riot between the two factions, which police disrupt with tear gas.  Tensions are ascribed to a local election in Gendema.
Police fire tear gas at a large crowd gathering petrol from a leaking pipeline.  The tear gas cannisters trigger a large explosion, killing many people.
Ex-civil war combatants demonstrate to receive their benefits.
300 prisoners riot when they are called out of their cells for an inspection designed to flush out drugs and other contraband.  Guards disrupt the riot with tear gas.
Doctors at Freetown's main public-funded hospital strike against poor working conditions and low salaries.
Health workers at public hospitals strike over low pay and poor working conditions.  Several patients die as a result of the strike.
170 nurses strike at a military hospital for higher wages.
Rioting breaks out between groups of Guineans living in Sierra Leone over Guinea's recent presidential election.  The rioting pits Malinke supporters of Alpha Conde against Fulani supporters of Cellou Dalein Diallo.
Two communities on Freetown's outskirts have a land dispute.  A reporter is killed during the dispute.
The main opposition candidate is pelted with stones, provoking riots between supporters of the opposition and ruling parties.
Rioting in which people were stabbed broke out between supporters of ruling and opposition parties during a by-election, police used tear gas to disperse crowd.
Miners went on strike to demand increased wages, better working conditions, and improved medical facilities.
Demonstration by miners turned violent, strikers tried to disarm police when gun went off and woman was killed. Police also fired tear gas and made arrests.
Pre-election violence broke out between supporters of opposition and ruling parties. Stones were thrown and attempt made to burn down house. 10 injured.
Diamond mine workers went on strike over bonuses and working conditions. Miners who tried to work during strike were beaten. Strike ended with company concessions.
Police opened fire to disperse crowd of demonstrating strikers blocking entry to work site, 2 killed.
100 nurses strike, complaining of poor management of the Ebola centre.
Nurses strike asking for hazard pay and better salaries.
An Ebola team is attacked by residents as they bury 5 victims of the disease.
Burial teams strike, demanding their weekly hazard pay.
A mob armed with machetes rampages a town after health workers try to take a blood sample from an elderly woman.
A mob throws stones at an ambulance, causing it to crash.
Health workers strike over unpaid bonuses.
Burial workers display dead bodies at a hospital in protest after they strike because of unpaid risk allowances.
Doctors strike to protest inadequate working conditions.
Nurses strike, demanding hazard pay for working in Ebola-affected areas.
3 people killed in Kono ahead of local by-elections. Reporting journalist was arrested and accused of giving false info.
After armed conflicts between the two communities in April and June last year, the government set up a probe which presented its report to the government earlier this year. The government has yet to act on the report.
protesters staged an anti-government demonstration in Tamale, some 400 miles (640 kms) north of here, demanding the resignation of the government, according to press reports here Monday.
protesters staged an anti-government demonstration in Tamale, some 400 miles (640 kms) north of here, demanding the resignation of the government, according to press reports here Monday.
protesters staged an anti-government demonstration in Tamale, some 400 miles (640 kms) north of here, demanding the resignation of the government, according to press reports here Monday.
Workers of the Central bank, 11 commercial banks, three insurance companies and the Social Security and National Insurance trust who belong to the Association of Financial Institutions are involved in the strike.
Police have arrested 38 students of the Tarkwa secondary school in western Ghana after riots Tuesday during which three people were raped and several others assaulted, the local press reported, quoting police officials.
About 500 Togolese nationals resident in Ghana's capital, Accra, Thursday demonstrated against Tuesday's coup attempt in their country and against France's decision not to intervene militarily.
Anti-government protesters demanding a transitional government to lead Ghana to democratic rule held a demonstration here on Friday, the second in a week.
At least 63 people have been killed since last Friday in fighting between the Gonja and Nawuri communities in northern Ghana near Tamale, the Ghana news agency (GNA) reported Sunday.
Nurses in Ghana's two biggest state-owned hospitals have began a strike to press the authorities for more pay and better working conditions, according to reports here Friday.
Nurses in Ghana's two biggest state-owned hospitals have began a strike to press the authorities for more pay and better working conditions, according to reports here Friday.
Authorities in Kumasi imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew after riots broke out when results were released showing Rawlings ahead in the Tuesday election.
Staff of Ghana's Cocoa Marketing Board (COCOBOD), ended Thursday a three-day strike which had halted loading operatins at the country's businest cocoa ports, the Ghanaian news agency (GNA) reported.
Staff of Ghana's Cocoa Marketing Board (COCOBOD), ended Thursday a three-day strike which had halted loading operatins at the country's businest cocoa ports, the Ghanaian news agency (GNA) reported.
Ghana's state news agency said Friday that a quarrel in a market over a piece of poultry had exploded into several days of bloodshed that left at least 50 people dead.
Ghana's state news agency said Friday that a quarrel in a market over a piece of poultry had exploded into several days of bloodshed that left at least 50 people dead.
University professors and lecturers went on strike Oct. 1, just before the start of the academic year, to demand higher salaries.
University professors and lecturers went on strike Oct. 1, just before the start of the academic year, to demand higher salaries.
University professors and lecturers went on strike Oct. 1, just before the start of the academic year, to demand higher salaries.
Hundreds of students from Ghana's three main universities marched through the streets of the capital Wednesday to demand the government and professors resolve a pay dispute that has delayed the start of classes.
Hundreds of students from Ghana's three main universities marched through the streets of the capital Wednesday to demand the government and professors resolve a pay dispute that has delayed the start of classes.
Hundreds of students from Ghana's three main universities marched through the streets of the capital Wednesday to demand the government and professors resolve a pay dispute that has delayed the start of classes.
Demonstrations occurred after an unlicensed radio station was taken off the air.
Eight people have been arrested in Ghana's second city Kumasi following religious violence between Muslims and Christians last week, a senior police source said Tuesday.
Tens of thousands of students from Ghana's three universities began boycotting classes Wednesday to demand increases in student loans.
Tens of thousands of students from Ghana's three universities began boycotting classes Wednesday to demand increases in student loans.
Tens of thousands of students from Ghana's three universities began boycotting classes Wednesday to demand increases in student loans.
At least 36 people have died in a renewal of ethnic violence in northern Ghana and an overnight curfew was imposed to prevent a new round of all-out warfare, the government said Thursday.
Authorities closed the University of Ghana on Friday, the 11th day of a national pay strike by lecturers.
Authorities closed the University of Ghana on Friday, the 11th day of a national pay strike by lecturers.
Authorities closed the University of Ghana on Friday, the 11th day of a national pay strike by lecturers.
Civil servants in Ghana are considering industrial action in support of a 96 percent wage increase claim following a spontaneous demonstration in Accra, union officials here said Thursday.
A Dagomba community is attacked by Konkombas following a claim that the Dagombas had stolen 16 cows.
Deputies loyal to President Jerry Rawlings' deputy announced plans Sunday to withdrew from Ghana's ruling coalition in a move likely to bolster opposition criticism of the president's economic strategy. Protest of VAT tax increases.
Shooting broke out at a huge anti-government demonstration in the Ghanaian capital Thursday, and at least two were reported dead and 17 wounded.
Commercial activities in Ghana's second largest city were paralyzed Thursday following a massive demonstration against the high cost of living in the West African nation.
Three public-sector unions in Ghana Tuesday called off planned demonstrations after a pledge from Finance Minister Kwesi Botchwey to see that a 20 percent pay rise they are claiming is implemented.
Some 4,000 university students staged a five-hour demonstration here Wednesday to protest at a dispute which has paralysed higher education in Ghana for four months.
One person was killed and seven were injured when police tried to disperse rampaging soccer fans in the Ghanaian city of Kumasi.
A 13-year-old boy was killed in a rampage by youths in central Ghana who were protesting the elevation of four chiefs in a centuries-old dispute.
A man was shot dead and seven people were seriously injured Monday in clshes which erupted during a demonstration by taxi drivers in the Ghanaian city of Kumasi, 200 kilometres (125 miles) northwest of Accra.
Fierce clashes between rival political supporters left at least 20 people injured at the weekend in two localities in Ghana during the campaign for general elections in December.
Fierce clashes between rival political supporters left at least 20 people injured at the weekend in two localities in Ghana during the campaign for general elections in December.
Fierce clashes between rival political supporters left at least 20 people injured at the weekend in two localities in Ghana during the campaign for general elections in December.
Police patrols were stepped up in urban centres across Ghana Monday after angry mobs killed at least 11 people alleged to be penis shrinkers.
Police patrols were stepped up in urban centres across Ghana Monday after angry mobs killed at least 11 people alleged to be penis shrinkers.
Air traffic controllers in Ghana have gone on strike to demand more pay and better working conditions, but aviation officials said they had hired replacements to ensure flights operated normally.
A riot broke out last week in Akwatia, 80 kilometers (50 miles) northwest of Accra, after one of 30 policemen investigating illegal mining by foreigners fired his pistol into an angry crowd, killing one resident.
An elderly man was shot dead and two people were wounded in northern Ghana at the weekend when police opened fire as Moslem hardliners attempted to spring 14 people from detention, a police source said here Monday.
Four people died and 24 were seriously wounded when clashes broke out over the weekend between two rival Muslim groups fighting over rights to a cemetery, police said.
Journalists and their supporters marched through Accra to protest the recent sentencing of two local journalists in a libel case brought by Ghana's first lady.
Three people were injured when police clashed with protesting students outside Ghana's main university, Accra police said.
An armed mob clashed with police and soldiers in southwestern Ghana, killing a pregnant woman and wounding several other people, witnesses said Monday.
Ghana's second largest university was shut down Thursday by administration authorities after student demonstrators attacked the homes of several faculty members.
More than 3,000 people ran riot in the Accra suburb of Mataheko on Saturday, attacking businesses owned by foreigners suspected of five murders in recent weeks.
Civilian junior doctors across Ghana went on strike Friday to press for pay rises to bring their salaries in line with those of colleagues in the police and the military.
One person died and eleven others were injured at the weekend when guards opened fire on angry football fans who tried to storm the palace of Ghana's Ashanti king at the weekend, police told AFP Monday.
Junior paramedics in Ghana launched a strike on Thursday to protest against overtime wage levels.
University technical staff have agreed to return to work on Monday, after intermittent strike action paralysed services on campuses throughout the country and forced classes to shut this week.
Three people have been shot dead and three others sustained serious gunshot wounds over a land dispute between traditional chiefs outside the Ghanaian capital, a police official told AFP Wednesday.
Workers at Ashanti Goldfields, Ghana's most successful mining company, were on strike Monday to protest against wide disparities between management and worker's salaries.
Ghana's government offered restive students more than a million dollars on Monday to help to pay for higher tuition fees, following violent protests last week against the hikes.
Some 300 students at the University of Ghana in Accra demonstrated on campus and boycotted lectures Thursday over hikes in tuition fees. On 9/15. the university is shut down.
About 20 people were injured and 30 houses were burned down in southern Ghana at the weekend in clashes sparked by a football dispute, police said Monday.
About a thousand opposition supporters took to the streets of Ghana's capital Thursday to protest against the government's political and economic policies, in particular against layoffs and hikes in medical fees.
Police killed one man after illegal miners attacked a mine owned by Ghana's giant Ashanti company, destroying buildings and cars, a television station reported on Sunday.
University lecturers in Ghana began a one-week strike Tuesday to back their demand for salary increases and better conditions.
All shops in Accra re-opened Monday as the Ghana Union Traders Association (GUTA) called off a one-week strike.
Members of the University Teachers' Association of Ghana (UTAG) began a new nationwide strike for improved salaries and conditions, association sources said Tuesday.
Eight people were seriously injured in clashes in the Ghanaian capital Accra between supporters of rival political parties, police said Tuesday.
Eight people were seriously injured in clashes in the Ghanaian capital Accra between supporters of rival political parties, police said Tuesday.
Ghanaians hopeful of a peaceful transition of power in this week's elections were shaken by the news Monday that police fired into an opposition demonstration and wounded a bystander.
An opposition leader appeared to be ahead in Ghana's presidential election Saturday, a race that will end the rule of the country's longest-serving president.
Opposition observers also said they had been harassed by government supporters, who prevented them from monitoring voting at some stations in the capital, Accra, the nearby port city of Tema and the eastern Volta Region.
Opposition observers also said they had been harassed by government supporters, who prevented them from monitoring voting at some stations in the capital, Accra, the nearby port city of Tema and the eastern Volta Region.
Opposition observers also said they had been harassed by government supporters, who prevented them from monitoring voting at some stations in the capital, Accra, the nearby port city of Tema and the eastern Volta Region.
Protesters stormed a polling station in Accra's residential Odorkor neighborhood shortly after voting started, smashing the ballot box and tearing up the voters' list, security officials said. It was not immediately clear who the attackers were
A stampede at a packed soccer match between top Ghana teams killed at least 100 people Wednesday night, a top government official said. Panic set in when police fired tear gas to subdue unruly fans, witnesses said.
Grief and anger swept Ghana on Thursday as thousands of relatives sought victims of a stampede in an Accra football stadium which killed some 130 people after police fired tear gas on a group of rioting fans.
Youths from Ghana's Ga ethnic group Sunday attacked a church in Accra for defying a one-month ban on loud music and drums imposed by elders of the animist community.
Angry mobs attacked Nima police station and burned tyres and roadside kiosks, forcing the deployment of army soldiers in the area and throughout the seaside capital.
At least 50 people have died and some 150 were wounded in ethnic clashes over the weekend in Ghana's northeastern Bawku town, police said Tuesday, amid reports of further sporadic violence in nearby areas.The Mamprusi are generally supporters o
The king of Ghana's influential Dagomba ethnic group and at least 40 other people were killed in factional clashes Wednesday, police said.
Pilots at bankrupt Ghana Airways went on strike Thursday, in a move that threatened to disrupt flights to Britain and the United States.
Twelve people remained under treatment for machete and gunshot wounds Friday, injuries suffered during a clash in northern Ghana that left four dead and dozens of homes burned, authorities said.
Ghana's former ruler Jerry Rawlings Tuesday led a noisy but peaceful protest against President John Kufuor's government to denounce spiralling prices, corruption and fiscal mismanagement during its two years in power.
Ballotting in the Upper Eastern region town of Bawku on Ghana's northern border with Burkina Faso was temporarily suspended after ethnic tensions provoked gunshots, one of which hit a soldier, deputy regional police commander Chief Superintende
At least four people were killed over New Year in inter-ethnic clashes in the township of Bawku in northern Ghana, government officials said Tuesday.
Hundreds have fled their homes after ethnic clashes that left an estimated 16 people dead in recent days in north-eastern Ghana, the national news agency reported Wednesday.
There have also been reports of local politicians trying to register minors and of violence breaking out at some registration centres.
Hundreds of activists in Ghana staged a protest outside parliament Tuesday against the sale of a majority stake in state-owned Ghana Telecom to Britain's mobile phone giant Vodafone.
At least six people have been killed in northern Ghana in pre-election violence which followed a weekend campaign rally, a local private radio station said on Tuesday, quoting police sources.
Hundreds of opposition protesters kept an all-night vigil outside the commission headquarters in Accra in protest at perceived attempts to manipulate the outcome of Sunday's vote.
Activists from both major parties march in support of their candidates, meeting each other at the end of the march and communicating using hand signals
Police fired tear gas to disperse a crowd of over 100 opposition party supporters, who were burning refuse and spreading bricks and tires on the road in response to allegations that the election was being rigged
About 300 opposition party supporters marched outside the electoral commission building with twigs to protest rumored voter fraud.  Riot police, military persone, and tanksl were deployed to maintain order and later broke up the crowd with tear gas and stun guns.
Police and Soldiers raided the office of the opposition New Patriotic Party office as they recounted election votes.  They confiscated laptops and documentation.
Machete-wielding men attacked an Accra shopping center.  Police are investigating the possibility the attack was politically motivated, though NPP spokesman Sammi Awuku claimed the ruling NDC party had sent party members to attack pro-oppositon merchants.
Gold field workers held a strike
Gold field workers held a strike
A Chinese miner was killed by shotgun wielding bandits
Lightning struck a prison causing the prisoners to riot and try to overtake the police subduing them. 
Opposition protesters were protesting against President Mahama's inaction to increase electricity output, whch is perceived to have crippled the economy. 
Ghana's movie stars joined workers to protest power cuts. 
Two men stopped the car of an unidentified man who is suspected of throwing acid on Adam Mahama, who died of the attack, and was the chairman for the New Patriotic Party. 
The slum was being domolished, leading residents to clash with police. 
Protesters were protesting against the rising cost of living in Tema and the decliing country economy. 
Doctors were calling for better working conditions and "perks," like housing, clothing, fuel allowances, company cars, overtime pay, free post-graduate medical education, improved pensions, free foreign healthcare, etc__ 
Pro-Democracy supporters hold demonstration and riots throughout 1990 demanding democratic reforms including multi-party elections
Students protest demanding multi-party democracy and improved campus conditions
Students and unemployed men march through the capital demanding resignation of Pres. Eyademan and Archbishop Robert Dosseh-Anyron.
Protesters respond to the finding of 22 bodies.  Pres. Eyadema is accused of orchestrating the deaths to prevent democratization.
Taxi and bus drivers strike over the atmosphere of insecurity.
General strike to call for Eyadema's resignation.
Soldiers protest over pay.
Protesters demonstrate in response to the arrest of an opposition leader.
Protesters demonstrate against the taking of communications centers by mutinous soldiers
Demonstrators march on the anniversary of mass riots against General Eyadema that eventually lead to his resignation from government.
Protesters attack both military and civilian supporters of General Eyadema.
Clashes between Moba and Chokossi tribes began over spilled sacks of groundnuts.
Clashes between Moba and Chokossi tribes began over spilled sacks of groundnuts.
Clashes between Mossi and Konkomba tribes begin when testing amulets thought to make the wearer bullet proof.
Violence between Eyadema supporters and non-Eyadema supporters occurred when the interim government banned Eyadmena's party.
Police strike and protest demanding higher pay.
Militants attack supporters of Gen Eyadema's political party in an attempt to rid the area of Eyadema supporters.
Protesters surround Prime Minister Koffigoh's office to demand investigation into the attempted murder of presidential candidate Gilchrist Olympio.
Ethnic groups clashed over a land dispute.
Police strike demanding better bonuses and special status.
Demonstrators protest the assassination of opposition leader Tavio Amorin.
Opposition members engage in general strike demanding the creation of peace-keeping forces separate from the armed forces, trial of soldiers in hostage situation, and setting up a new government.  Sporadic incidents of violence.
Opposition members engage in general strike demanding the creation of peace-keeping forces separate from the armed forces, trial of soldiers in hostage situation, and setting up a new government.  Sporadic incidents of violence.
Opposition supporters rally to show support for the continuation of a general strike.
Villagers attack soldiers when they attempt to arrest the local chief, clashes continue when soldiers retaliate against villlagers.
Pro-democracy supporters march to ask for help from German and French mediators, march turned violent when military troops attempted to dismantle march.
Members of the Presidential Guard go on a looting spree in an opposition strong hold neighborhood in Lome, the looting was in response to the deaths of security forces members.
Soldiers in the Togolese army engage in ethnic cleansing, killing any soldier who was not a part of Eyadema's ethnic group.
Several bombings of supporters of Gen. Eyadema.
Opposition rally demanding Olympio be allowed to run for president.
Opposition demonstration to demand Supreme Court's acceptance of Olympio as presidential candidate.
Opposition supporters ransacked polling stations on election day.
Unknown assailants attack a military camp where the president resides.
Uniformed gunmen kidnap and kill opposition leader and two of his supporters after weeks of threats by soldiers and the secret police
Bombiing at the home of an opposition politician.
Armed men storm six polling stations, intimidate opposition supporters and remove ballot boxes.
Youths protest election results demanding they be annulled.
Opposition supporters march in protest to the obstacles RPT uses to prevent opposition expression.
Pro-government supporters march for peace, unity, solidarity and  . . . economic growth.
Opposition supporters demonstrate outside police headquarters demanding release of opposition leader.
Students demonstrate over unpaid scholarships.
Students strike over police aggression that caused injuries at previous demonstration.
Demonstration against police arrests of opposition supporters.
Demonstration against police arrests of opposition supporters.
Voters peacefully march when ballots didn't appear in opposition stronghold areas.
Youths protest election results announcing the re-election of Gen. Eyadema
Youths protest election results announcing the re-election of Gen. Eyadema
Civilians stage a general strike in an attempt to force the resignation of Gen. Eyadema
Students strike over release of funds leads to clashes between supporters and opponents of the strike.
Opposition group, Action Committee for Renewal, organized a demonstration to show support for international inquiry into alleged massacres of 1998.
Students strike demanding payment of scholarships and better facilities.
Opposition supporters protest the arrest of one of their leaders, protests were quickly disbanded by riot police.
Pro-government supporters demonstrate asking opposition groups to take part in elections despite new law preventing some opposition leaders from candidacy.
Opposition supporters protest the amendment that will prevent some opposition leaders from candidacy in upcoming elections, also demand release of opposition leader.
Youth members of the ruling party gather outside presidential palace to show support for Gen. Eyadema.
Opposition supporters protest election results in which Gen Eyadema's party retained the majority of parliament seats.
Youths ransack two polling stations and destroy ballot boxes.
Opposition and pro-government suporters demonstrate to show support for their presidential candidates.
Students attempt to hold a demonstration demanding students funds be disbursed, demonstration escalated when police tried to disband the group.
Pro-government supporters rally at the presidential palace to celebrate the EU's decision to end sanctions against Eyadema, deaths occurred when the crowd tried to storm the palace.
Students protest the swearing in of Gnassingbe as president after Gen. Eyadema's death.
Opposition supporters protest and strike over appointment of Gnassingbe as president.  Several protests and periods of general strike occurred violence was sporadic.
Pro-government supporters demonstrate to show support for Gnassingbe.
Opposition supporters rally to support the return of Olympio from exile in Ghana.
Pro-government supportes demonstrate to demand elections be held as scheduled.
Opposition supporters demand postponement of elections due to opposition exclusion from election.
Opposition supporters protest to demand voter's cards, show support for opposition and protest police brutality in previous marches.
Opposition supporters protest to demand voter's cards, show support for opposition and protest police brutality in previous marches.
Soldiers attack opposition supporters at polling stations.
Opposition supporters protest after hearing reports of fraud in elections and after Gnassingbe is announced winner.
Bombing of a security base, opposition leaders are accused of orchestrating the attack.
Soccer fans stage a protest outside German embassy requesting visas to travel for soccer games.
Taxi drivers strike over illegal fines and arbitrary arrests by police.
Soccer fans riot after game with Mali, cause unknown.
A mob lynches four thieves accused of robbing women earlier in the week.
Military forces raid the home of the president's brother, the defense minister, to arrest him along with ruling party officials and soldiers said to be involved in a coup plot.
Thousands of demonstrators protest, calling for the upcoming presidential election to be held over two rounds.
Thousands of opposition activists protest to call for presidential elections to be held over two rounds.
Thousands of people protest against their national football team being banned from the next two editions of the African Cup of Nations.
Police use teargas against demonstrations led by an opposition presidential candidate claiming to have won a disputed election.
Supporters of presidential candidates march against each other.
More than 7000 protesters demonstrate against the election victory of Faure Gnassingbe.  Police repress with tear gas.
Opposition party protests election results.  Police use tear gas, wounding 30.
More than 6000 demonstrators take to the streets to protest presidential election results.
Thousands of supporters of the main opposition party demonstrate against the party leadership's decision to join the government.
Supporters of an opposition political leader demonstrate in front of his house.  Police fire tear gas into the crowd.
Police use tear gas to break up an opposition protest against legislation that regulates street demonstrations.
Hundreds of students protest against a new academic system.  Police use tear gas, and the protests escalate to riots over food and living conditions.
Several thousand protest to demand the return of nine parliamentarians removed from their seats.
Students protest at two public universities over a new bursary policy.
Students protest at two public universities over a new bursary policy.
During protest, Attipou was beat by police for taking photos of officers seizing motorcycle.
Protest march took place, security forces knocked Tadegnon unconscious after filming violent breakup of demonstration. 10 security officers took part in assault.
Tanker went missing, suspected to have been hijacked by pirates while at anchor, crew later freed.
Demonstration took place demanding electoral reforms.
Citizens demonstrated against the adoption of new electoral code. Police made arrests and used tear gas. protesters later erected barricades and threw objects at police, both citizens and police injured.
Ayi was covering demonstration when 2 groups of demonstrators beat him and stole his camera.
Security forces raided home of Fabre, firing tear gas  and injuring some of its occupants.
Demonstrators rallied to protest government crackdown on the opposition movement.
Citizens demonstrated to protest lack of action over killings by security forces over decades.
Oil tanker was hijacked by pirates with 17 crew and technician on board. Ship and crew released 5 days later after pirates stole oil.
Thousands gathered for demonstration march to major commercial area despite government ban on protests, seeking to delay elections to allow reforms to be implemented. Police fired tear gas to disperse crowd, crowd responded by throwing rocks and burning tires.
Coalition and supporters held march to protest against government law against demonstrations and end to current government. Civil rights group made call for women to engage in week-long sex strike from husbands to force resignation of president.
Demonstrators protested to demand electoral reforms before upcoming elections, police dispersed crowd with tear gas.
Pirates attacked oil tanker, taking control of ship and kidnapping 24 Russian sailors. Engaged in firefight with navy before escaping. Crew later released after pirates stole part of gas cargo.
Several hundred demonstrated in support of the government.
Violent mob with sticks and machetes occupied area where opposition protest was to take place. Several people were injured. Militia stated it wanted to protect elderly in area from potential tear gas attacks.
Women belonging to Let's Save Togo dressed in red shouted anti-government slogans and demonstrated to demand political reform, group has called for resignation of President Gnassingbe.
Citizens chanted anti-government slogans, demonstrated to demand large-scale electoral reforms and the removal of President Faure Gnassingbe.
Pirates captured oil tanker and transferred oil cargo to their barge. Crew locked in cabin, ship released next day.
Citizens demonstrated to mark anniversary of 1990 demonstration against rule of Gnassingbe Eyadema (current president's father), security forces fired tear gas into crowd. Some youths set tires on fire and attempted to set up barricades.
Security forces repressed opposition forces before they were able to organize a protest
protesters supporting opposition figures who were detained protested the government
Togo journalists protested new harsh restrictions on press freedom
Togo opposition forces demonstrated the detention of their leaders by their government
Trade Unions and Teachers unions join three day strike to protest low wages and working conditions for government workers
Togo opposition forces protested the death of an activist in government custody
Togo security forces repressed opposition coalition before they could march
Oppositionists call for political reform, throw rocks at police.
Government supporters demonstrate against oppositionists and in support of the ruling party.
Oppositionists call for limits to presidential terms.
Students protest in the streets after repeated strikes by teachers and call for authorities to meet demands of teachers.
protesters supporting teachers' strike clash with security forces along a major highway. Police fired tear gas to dispense crowd.
Thousands marched to protest the results of the elections that extended family dynasty's rule.
About 50 journalists protested to demand release of a colleague held on suspicion of defaming the country's security minister.
Clashes between protesters and security forces leave 5 dead.
Opposition supporters demonstrate against Pres. Biya.
Opposition supporters demonstrate  in response to government detention of journalists and other political prisoners.
Students protest demanding a national conference on multiparty government and to address nations other problems
Students protest demanding the release of fellow students that had been arrested the previous day.
Street vendors riot in response to police raids on their businesses.
Opposition parties call for civil disobedience to demand multiparty democracy.
Opposition parties organize strike to put pressure on Pres. Biya to resign and hold a national conference.
Opposition parties organize strike to put pressure on Pres. Biya to resign and hold a national conference.
Opposition parties organize strike to put pressure on Pres. Biya to resign and hold a national conference.
Opposition parties organize strike to put pressure on Pres. Biya to resign and hold a national conference.
Opposition parties organize strike to put pressure on Pres. Biya to resign and hold a national conference.
Opposition supporters demand the release of members of the Social Democratic Front and the National Union for Democracy and Progress.
Violent clashes occurred when the Foulbe attempted to impose a general strike and the Baya farmers were trying to get their produce to market.
Opposition march to demand resignation of Pres. Biya, turns violent when John Fru Ndi (leader of the SDF) is injured.
Journalists protest the banning of five independent newspapers.
Opposition supporters demonstrate to demand Pres. Biya hold a national conference.
Clashes between Choa and Kotoko clans during voter registration, soldiers were called in to end the fighting.
Clashes between opposition militants and soldiers occur at polling stations.
Opposition and government supporters rally on the eve of the first presidential election.
Opposition supporters riot when the Supreme Court announces Pres. Biya has been re-elected.
Supporters of opposition leader Ndi protest after hearing rumors that authorities planned to transfer Ndi from his home.
Opposition supporters protest and riot in response to the arrest of an opposition leader.
Opposition supporters protest and riot in response to the arrest of an opposition leader.
Opposition supporters protest and riot in response to the arrest of an opposition leader.
Teachers strike, cause unknown.
Clashes between Choa and Kotoko tribe, immediate cause unknown.
Students march in protest of death of some students killed in car accident and the transfer of courses to new campus.
Clashes between Choa and Kotoko tribe over which tribe is responsible for attacks on travelers.
Highway bandits known as the cutters of the road attack soldiers patrolling the area.
Rebels attack and kill three soldiers.
Airport workers strike claiming they have not been paid for five to eight months.
Airport workers strike claiming they have not been paid for five to eight months.
Airport workers strike claiming they have not been paid for five to eight months.
Clashes between tribes over a strip of farmland that lies between the two groups.
Opposition supporter attempt to march to presidential palace to demand constitutional conference.
Opposition members protest the replacement of elected mayors with government appointees.
Clashes between Bambili  and Babanki tribes over land rights.
Teachers strike demanding back pay, wage increases and improved work conditions.
Students strike for better conditions and in protest of having to pay for study benefits.
Clashes between the Bambuis and Fungies tribes over land rights.
Attacks on military and civilian facilities by English-speaking separatists.
During two weeks of legislative campaigning clashes between opposition and pro-government supporters result in 6 deaths.
During two weeks of legislative campaigning clashes between opposition and pro-government supporters result in 6 deaths.
Pro-government groups arrest, beat-up and intimidate opposition voters at polling stations.
A gang of robbers attack civilians.
Airport workers strike demanding better work conditions.
Soccer fans attack white expatriates in retaliation against anti-African racism in the World Cup.
Railroad workers strike demanding past due wages.
Air Cameroon pilots strike over working conditions and past due wages.
Transportation workers strike over raises in fuel taxes.
Members of the Southern Cameroon National Council hold secessionist demonstrations.
Members of the Southern Cameroon National Council hold secessionist demonstrations.
Students boycott classes and protest over increased costs, exam conditions and grants payments.
Clashes between Muslim groups over power in the region.
Teachers strike over working conditions and professional standards.
Citizens gather to show support for French President Jacques Chirac during his visit to Cameroon.
Citizens protest over the disappearance of 9 men arrested by the paramilitary group, Operational Command.
Gasoline tanker drivers strike over increased regulations and fuel prices.
Members of the Southern Cameroon National Council hold secessionist demonstrations.
Members of the Southern Cameroon National Council hold secessionist demonstrations.
Nine detainees stage a hunger strike in protest of being detained for over a year awaiting trial.
Oil pipeline workers strike over unpaid wages and working conditions.
Clashes between SDF and CPDM prior to legislative elections.
Protests over fraudulent election results.
Members of the Social Democratic Front elected to parliament boycott parliament in response to fraudulent election.
Rioting breaks out after police kill a taxi driver at a checkpoint.
Traders strike due to police harassment and custom officials seizing goods.
Taxi drivers strike over police extortion, confiscation of licenses and unjustified fines.
Taxi drivers strike over police extortion, confiscation of licenses and unjustified fines.
Members of CRRN hold weekly demonstrations to demand free and fair vote in upcoming elections.
Nigerian bandits cross the border and raid a village, carrying out a four hour raiding spree.
Opposition supporters march daily in protest of the murder of a local opposition politician.
Camair employees strike over past due wages.
Chinese resident march in response to murder of a Chinese shopkeeper.
Students protest demanding better academic facilities and the release of fellow demonstrating students from police custody.
Students protest demanding better academic facilities and the release of fellow demonstrating students from police custody.
Students protest demanding better academic facilities and the release of fellow demonstrating students from police custody.
Ethnic clashes over the election of new tribal chief.
Shanty town residents protest governments decision to bulldoze their homes.
Members of the Southern Cameroon National Council protest the arrest of some of their members.
Anti-homosexual supporters protest outside court hearing case of defamation by journalists accusing several people of being homosexuals.
Bamoun tribe demonstrate against police harassment, Ntumu responds to the demonstration by attacking the demonstrators leading to ethnic clashes.
SCNC protest over arrests of opposition members during meeting.
Clashes between factions of the Social Democratic Front.
Camair employees strike over insurance payments being deducted from wages.
Camair employees strike over insurance payments being deducted from wages.
Clashes between residents of Boyo and Oku villages over village borders.
Clashes between residents of Boyo and Oku villages over village borders.
Bandits from the CAR attack a village, looting it and abducting 16 people.
Health care workers at state hospitals strike demanding incresaed wages and revised retirement age.
Health care workers at state hospitals strike demanding incresaed wages and revised retirement age.
Citizens protest after two weeks of no electricity.
Insurgents on speed boats attack a group of soldiers.  The insurgents are opposed to the transfer of oil rich Bakassi from Nigeria to Cameroon.
Civil servants strike demanding higher wages and raised retirement age.
Members of SDF demonstrate against Pres. Biya's bid to remove presidential terms limits from the constitution.
Protesters gather outside television station demanding its re-opening after government forces closed it down.
Members of the PPYC demonstrate against Pres. Biya's bid to change the constitution to remove presidential term limits.
Transportation workers strike over raises in fuel taxes, strike leads to rioting by youths and opposition members over food prices and Pres. Biya's bid to amend the constitution allowing him a third term.
Transportation workers strike over raises in fuel taxes, strike leads to rioting by youths and opposition members over food prices and Pres. Biya's bid to amend the constitution allowing him a third term.
Transportation workers strike over raises in fuel taxes, strike leads to rioting by youths and opposition members over food prices and Pres. Biya's bid to amend the constitution allowing him a third term.
Transportation workers strike over raises in fuel taxes, strike leads to rioting by youths and opposition members over food prices and Pres. Biya's bid to amend the constitution allowing him a third term.
Transportation workers strike over raises in fuel taxes, strike leads to rioting by youths and opposition members over food prices and Pres. Biya's bid to amend the constitution allowing him a third term.
Transportation workers strike over raises in fuel taxes, strike leads to rioting by youths and opposition members over food prices and Pres. Biya's bid to amend the constitution allowing him a third term.
Armed men abduct and kill a regional official and five soldiers in an attack on Cameroonian troops. The insurgents are opposed to the transfer of oil rich Bakassi from Nigeria to Cameroon.
Armed men attack and would three Cameroonian soldiers. The insurgents are opposed to the transfer of oil rich Bakassi from Nigeria to Cameroon.
Armed insurgents identified as rebels seeking independence for Bakassi attack a group of soldiers. The insurgents are opposed to the transfer of oil rich Bakassi from Nigeria to Cameroon.
Pirates in flying boats attack a trawler.
Rebels claiming that they want more attention to schools and economic development in Bakassi take six oil workers hostage.  One hostage is killed in a rescue attempt by Nigerian troops.
Protesters demonstrate against government corruption.
Armed men attack a trawler and kill the Greek captain.
Bakassi rebels abduct several oil workers and hold them for over three months.  The insurgents are opposed to the transfer of oil rich Bakassi from Nigeria to Cameroon.
Five foreign fishermen are kidnapped off a fishing trawler by forces unknown.
Pirates attack a private boat, but they are driven off by army forces.
Journalists at Le Messager strike over salary arrears.
Rebels on a boat shoot dead a police officer, also in a boat.  The insurgents are opposed to the transfer of oil rich Bakassi from Nigeria to Cameroon.
An opposition leader and a pro-democracy activist begin a 1200 mile walk around the country to press for pre-electoral demands.
BIR Delta members, a rapid response unit, attack fishermen after a soldier's mobile is stolen.
Rebels kidnap seven Chinese nationals in the disputed peninsula of Bakassi.
Gunmen attack a security outpost and steal weapons and other supplies.
Journalists protest death of an editor in detention and are attacked by police.
Prisoners riot, protesting living conditions and demanding the warden step down.
A rebel group attacks oil workers.
Public sector union members protest, demanding higher pay and better benefits.
A rebel group attacks a French-run oil field.
A shadowy rebel group believed to be a branch of the Bakassi Freedom Fighters attacks police paramilitaries in the Bakassi region, killing 2 and kidnapping 13, including a regional prefect.  The abductees are released 10 days later.
Rebels attack soldiers.
25 pirates attack and rob a bank before escaping on speedboats.  7 die in the ensuing highspeed chase.
Citizens in Douala lynch a car thief, triggering a clash with a criminal gang.  Five die during the fighting.
Two weeks before an election, gunmen loyal to an opposition leader, and carrying signs denouncing the current president, blockade a major bridge and exchange gunfire with police.
Activists protest, demanding independence for the English-speaking section of Cameroon.  Police arrest 126.
Gunmen kill two troops on the same day as a national election.  The gunmen are unknown, as is their cause.
A Cameroonian traditional prince and one of his aides were held captive for a month before their families paid a ransom. Police later arrested 40 suspects.
Protesters gathered in Yaounde to decry homosexuality and encourage citizens to report gay acts to the police, as homosexuality is outlawed in Cameroon.
Opposition party members gathered to protest Paul Biya's continued 30-year presidency as his supporters celebrated it. Police forced them to dispere with water cannons and tear gas.
Pirates attacked a ship and kidnapped three sailors and released them on March 11
Seven members of a French family were abducted by six armed Islamic militants believed to be members of Boko Haram on three motorbikes
Cameroonian troops have clashed with the Seleka rebels of the Central African Republic on the border of the two countries
A charity providing help to homosexuals with HIV suffered an arson attack
A gay rights activist was found dead in his home after attackers broke his neck and burned his face hands and feet with an Iron
Two transgender women were attacked by a mob before being rescued by local police
A policeman was killed after a dispute between a border policeman and an army lieutenant from Central African Republic who claimed his badge had been stolen and demanded its return
More than 100 members of the Association of Cameroonian Youths demonstrated to demand stricter enforcement of anti-gay laws,  and posted anti-gay signs on bars suspected of being gay-friendly and on various school buildings
About 15 armed men abducted a French priest after they could not carry away a safe from the priest's office
An armed group from CAR attacked a military base in Cameroon. 7 are killed including two Cameroonian soldiers.
Cameroonian forces become engaged in a battle with Boko Haram when fighting spills over the Nigerian border. 1 woman is killed. Nigerian jets accidentally bomb a Cameroonian border post.
Boko Haram fighters engage Cameroonian soldiers in an unnamed town leaving 6 militants and 1 soldier dead.
Suspected Boko Haram militants kidnap 2 Italian priests and a Canadian Nun.
A bomb destroys the car of an outspoken journalist who was warned by the government to be careful over his coverage of security forces.
Cameroonian soldiers free 16 hostages who were held by unidentified gunmen.
Boko Haram attack a police post to free several prisoners killing 2 people.
Boko Haram militants attack a camp of Chinese road workers kidnapping 10 and killing one. Militants also raided the armory of a police post in nearby Waza.
Boko Haram militants attack a group of Cameroonian soldiers who had arrested 2 militants. Three soldiers were wounded.
Cameroonian security forces come across and engage militants believed to be from Boko Haram killing 8.
Boko Haram militants kidnap two teenage children of a leading Muslim cleric.
A Cameroonian police officer was killed in a Boko Haram attack on the village of Nariki.
Boko Haram militants kill two Cameroonian soldiers in a cross-border raid.
Boko Haram militants attack a village killing 15 and kidnapping many civilians including a top officials wife.
Boko Haram militants kill 10 people including a Cameroonian soldier in an attack on Zigague.
Boko Haram militants attack a border crossing with Cameroon and are repelled by Cameroonian soldiers who kill 40 militants. A similar attack occurs a week later leading to 100 dead militants.
A CAR militant group kidnaps 15 Cameroonians and a Polish priest.
A Boko Haram rocket attack kills 8 civilians and injuring more.
Boko Haram militants attack Cameroonian villages and are repelled by Cameroonian forces. 107 militants and 30 civilians are killed in the fighting.
Boko Haram militants attack Cameroonian villages and are repelled by Cameroonian forces. 107 militants and 30 civilians are killed in the fighting.
A Boko Haram attack kills four civilians. Cameroonian soldiers attack militants killing 39.
A series of simultaneous attacks kills at least 3 civilians before militants are pushed back into Nigeria.
Around 5,000 Boko Haram militants attack a convoy and an army base before they were repelled by Cameroon forces leaving 116 militants dead.
The Cameroonian Air Force attacks Boko Haram positions killing several militants.
Boko Haram fighters attacked military bases in Kolofata, but were repelled by Cameroon troops. 143 militants were killed. 
Boko Haram attacked Mabass village, torched homes, killed 3 people and took 60 hostages. Cameroon forces pursued the attackers, 24 hostages were freed. 
Boko Haram attacked Bonderi village, engaging in clashes with troops.
A special operation freed Nitsch Eberhard Robert, a German citizen abducted in Nigeria in July 2014 by Boko Haram.
Twelve soldiers were wounded in Boko Haram attacks on Fotokol.
Three Chad soldiers, 123 militants were killed when Boko Haram attacked a Chadian army contingent in northern Cameroon.
Boko Haram killed 81 civilians, 6 Cameroonian and 13 Chadian soldiers in Fotokol, and burnt a local moque. The attack was repelled by troops, killing 200 militants.
Boko Haram attacked Fotokol after being defeated the previous day by troops. 91 cvilians were killed, over 500 people were wounded. Militants were repelled.
Boko Haram attacked a bus, killing 7 and kidnapping around 10 people.
Five soldiers and 86 militants died in a Boko Haram ambush on a local military base.
Several thousand people took to the streets to denounce Boko Haram and call for the killing of the group's leader.
Sixteen civilians were kidnapped near Gbabio village in an attack on a bus by armed militia from the Central African Republic.
Residents killed several suspected fighters from a Central African Republic rebel group who attempted to kidnap 8 people from the town. The hostages were released, several militants were killed.
Boko Haram attacked an army position in Amchide. The attack was repelled without losses on the side of the soldiers.
Boko Haram attacked Buea village, killing 19 civilians.
At least two soldiers were killed in clashes with Boko Haram when militants ambushed a patrol around Krawa-Maffa village.
Two female suicide bomber blew themselves up near Cameroon's Rapid Intervention Battalion in Fotokol, killing 11 people.
Around 80 Boko Haram militants attacked Kamouna village, killing two people. 7 soldiers stationed in the village were unsuccesful in repelling the attack. 
A suicide bomber attack on a market in Maroua left 11 dead.
A suicide bomber killed 20 people in an attack on a bar.
Three villagers were beheaded in a Boko Haram raid on Tchebe-Tchebe and Dzaba villages. The assailants also set land owned by villagers as well as a Catholic church on fire.
Three villagers were beheaded in a Boko Haram raid on Tchebe-Tchebe and Dzaba villages. The assailants also set land owned by villagers as well as a Catholic church on fire.
A suicide bomber killed 14 people in an attack on a market.
Boko Haram killed 4 people in a raid on Afade village. Assailants torched police and military facilities.
Boko Haram killed 9 villagers and kidnapped 135 in Tchakarmari, Kangaleri, and Chakamari.
Boko Haram killed 9 villagers and kidnapped 135 in Tchakarmari, Kangaleri, and Chakamari.
Boko Haram killed 9 villagers and kidnapped 135 in Tchakarmari, Kangaleri, and Chakamari.
Police rescued 70 people who were prisoners of an Islamic holy man on a raid on an Islamic school. 
Troops killed 10 Boko Haram militants when the militants attacked Ashigashia.
Boko Haram's attack on the town of Blame led to the deaths of two soldiers and eight civilians.
A double suicide attack killed at least 30 people in Kerawa.
Hundreds of soldiers marched to the prime minister's office and national assembly demanding a pay increase.
A double suicide attack killed at least 7 people in Kolofata.
Two civilians and one policeman died in a suicide attack when two young suicide bombers were stopped for inspection before entering a market.
Two suicide bombers injured 2 people in Gouzoudou.
Boko Haram militants attacked Amchide, but were reppeled by troops, who killed 17 militants.
Boko Haram briefly overran the town of Kewara but pulled out without fighting when troops arrived.
Two suicide bombers killed 9 and injured 29 people in an attack in Kangaleri.
Suicide bombers killed 3 people in an attack on a mosque.
Four suicide bombers killed a local chief and his family and injured 10 people.
Two suicide bombers killed 5 people in Dabanga.
Two suicide bombers killed 7 people in Waza. A third bomber was shot by a soldier.
A suicide bomber killed 7 people and injured 30 in Kolofata.
Rebel soldiers attempt coup in order to end 'Muslim domination.'
Journalists strike and several are arrested
Islamic fundamentalists attack Christians
Students attempt attack on head of college and are killed by other students
Newspaper workers strike, demanding higher wages
Students kidnap children and family members of university employees after riot
Former oil minister goes on hunger strike to protest illegal detention
Citizens riot after creation of nine new states is announced
Christians and Muslims clash after Muslims protest arrival of Christian evangelist
Students riot, protesting state government's policies on books and exams
Tiv and Jukun tribes clash, killing 100
Christians and Muslims clash, killing 8
Four communities clash in ancient land dispute, killing 8
Students protest sexual harassment from teachers, prompting closing of university
Citizens riot, protesting hike in public transport fares
Citizens protest soaring transportation costs and demand government's resignation
Christians and Muslims clash over market siting and riots spread through Kaduna
Air traffic controllers strike, demanding higher wages and better working conditions
Students set cars on fire over high fuel prices, but are quickly subdued by police
Rival tribes clash over boundary dispute
Lawyers strike to pressure government to bring activists to trial.
Tiv youths raid Jukun village and kill 15 women after one of their own women killed in land claim
Rival tribes clash over boundary dispute
Citizens riot after chieftain assassinated
Teachers strike, protesting new laws on primary education funding
Rival Muslim sects clash
Civil servants strike, demanding higher wages
University professors strike, demanding higher wages
Teachers strike, protesting new laws on primary education funding
Ogoni tribesmen attack Shell-Nigeria and destroy $30 million worth of equipment in retaliation for oil spills destroying rivers and crops
Petrol truck drivers strike, after colleague killed by cow in market.  Truckers had petitioned for market's relocation.
Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation workers strike, demanding better working conditions
Citizens march, demanding the release of election results
Citizens demand election results be annulled
Students protest annullment of elections
Attorneysstrike in response to election annullment
General strike leads to mass rioting over election annullment
Citizens protest after election challenge blocked in court
Citizens strike, protesting election nullification
Bankers strike over liquidity crunch
Journalists strike to protest banning of media organizations
Citizens strike, demanding military leader resign
Citizens protest transition, demanding complete power be given to civilian government
Oil workers strike, protesting interim government
Citizens strike in pro-democracy protest
Rival tribes clash over land disputes
Pro-democracy group organizes protest demanding election winner be given power
Thousands attend return of presidential election winner and demand he be put in power
protesters attempt to march for democracy, but are dispersed by police
Pilots strike, claiming working conditions are dangerous
Supporters of presidential election winner celebrate and march to his residence after interim government established by military declared illegal
Citizens protest and riot over fuel prices
Citizens strike over hike in fuel prices.  Riots erupt when civilian government and democratic institutions dismantled.
College students and university students clash over anti-government march plans
Guma tribesmen clash with police over boundary changes
Students attack Muslims students clash with students while protesting lifting of ban on male visitors in the female dorms
Workers from rival tribes clash over rumors the other was appropriated a greater portion of land
Refinery workers and tank drivers strike, demanding higher wages
Students go on hunger strike and stage sit-in at Niger Embassy to protest non-payment of grants
Citizens protest against tensions between Nigeria and Cameroon, demanding both governments seek peace
Nurses and midwives strike, demanding hazard pay and teaching allowances
Oil workers shut down all Nigeria's fuel reserve depots, protesting plans to privatize management
Rival factions of students' unions clash after election of student leader
Soldiers kill and torture members of Ogoni tribe in attempts to quell their protests to Shell of river and land pollution
Citizens demonstrate against military government
Police storm home of former election winner, placing him and all in the house under house arrest
Scattered riots break out in southwestern Nigeria against military government, but most citizens ignore calls to protest
Students stage violent pro-democracy demonstration, attacking personnel of state military administrator
Women march in support of presidential election winner
Oil workers strike after government fails to produce jailed opposition leader and are later joined by citizens
Citizens march and riot against military government
Citizens attack shop owners that attempt to break strike
Riots break out upon Jesse Jackson's arrival to negotiate peace.  Police open fire on crowds.
Pro-democracy group claims responsibility for grenade attack on Cabinet minister's home
Citizens firebomb mansions belonging to the Labor Minister after military leader dissolved labor unions
Citizens firebomb mansions belonging to the Labor Minister after military leader dissolved labor unions
University professors strike, demanding higher wages
Unidentified gunmen suspected to be soldiers fire guns toward and attack cars containing democracy activists
Unidentified gunmen suspected to be soldiers throw gasoline bombs at the Campaign for Democracy headquarters
Citizens attempt to blow up Nigeria's biggest fuel depot in pro-democracy demonstration
Dock workers strike, demanding higher wages
Detained authors go on hunger strike to draw attention to ethnic clashes in Nigeria
Pro-military citizens torch opposition leader's home
Citizens protest rumors ofraises in gasoline prices
Students riot, demanding compensation after oil spill damaged villages
Detained alleged hijacker protests beginning of 2nd year in detention with hunger strike, prompting supporting marches in neighboring countries
Football players strike, protesting treatment by coaches
Muslims attack and lynch non-Muslim after he was seen tearing pages out of the Koran
Teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens march in support of military leader after rumors of coups surface.
Former election winner goes on hunger strike to press for his release
Banknote printers strike, demanding higher wages
Ibos and Hausas clash at open market
Government minister, angry over court decision against his girlfriend, sends police to attack court employees.  Lawyers strike in response.
Citizens strike on anniversary of failed election
Tanker drivers refuse to carry petroleum, protesting government interference in their union
Demonstrators protest execution of nine anti-government activists
Sporadic protests continue in front of British Embassy after Nigeria was suspended from the Commonwealth.  Citizens blame Britain for Nigeria's current status
Citizens stage silent protest on 2-year anniversary of military leader's power grab.
Youths clash with police during rally to commemorate massacred Ogonis
Citizens protest military leader's decision to boycott African Cup
Clashes erupt between tribes, and a policeman is killed, prompting over 50 arrests
Anti-government group claims responsibility for a plane crash that kills General Abacha's son.
Shell employees strike in protest of decision to lay off 500 workers
Air traffic controllers strike in response to alleged beating of their boss
Gunmen attack home of singer known for political protests, killing 3
Four men torch electoral commission office after being denied voter registration cards
Citizens clash with police during municipal elections
Rival factions of Hausa clash over municipal elections
Ethnic clashes break out after Fulani man raped a Karimojo woman and cut off her hand
University professors strike, demanding higher wages and better working conditions
Ugep and Admin tribesmen clash over land disputes
Students block oil company from accessing rigs
Pro-government gunmen attack and torch home of opposition leader
Gunmen attack and kill detained opposition leader's wife and driver, prompting protests
Students clash with police on anniversary of failed election
Tanker drivers strike, demanding better working conditions
Citizens protest arrests linked to policeman's death, claiming he was stealing property when killed
Junior newspaper workers strike, demanding higher wages
Muslims and Christians clash after Christian preacher seized while giving public sermon
Shiites and police clash after Muslim leaders arrested for inciting previous religious clashes
Mob riots after discovering decapitated children sacrificed in rituals
Two women attacked and brutally murdered as part of rituals
Muslim students march against mini-skirts and other inappropriate clothing
Youths clash with police over alleged police misbehavior
Police attack health workers after policeman's wife died in hospital
Shell junior and senior workers strike, protesting non-payment of safety allowances
Students protest tuition fees and a student leader is stabbed
University professors riot, protesting outcome of previous strike
Unemployed youths protest lack of jobs by taking a barge carrying Europeans captive
Citizens protest and attack polling stations during municipal elections
Ijaw tribesmen kidnap 127 Shell workers from oil installations, protesting pollution
Women erect barricades, protesting redistricting of tribal grounds.  Police crash into a barricade, killing all 7 occupants of the car.
Youths protest Shell presence, giving them 12 hours to stop oil productions or they would attack installations.
Rival tribes clash in dispute over location of oil wells
Rival political parties clash during municipal election runoffs
Rival tribes clash over election of new village chief
Dock workers strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens riot after marketplace fire destroys goods
Youths riot, accusing Bassambiri villagers of desecrating the dead and stealing supplies
Rival tribes clash over proposed move of municipal headquarters
Youths protest worsening fuel shortages
Muslims attack police station the day before Muslim leader set to appear in court
Citizens riot over fuel shortages
Ife and Modakeke tribes clash over rumors of mistreatment
Rival student gangs clash in gunfight at university
Oil workers kidnap 75 Mobil workers, demanding better working conditions
Rival tribes clash over relocation of municipal government
Rival tribes clash over claims that Itsekiri tribesmen attacked Ijaw village
Oil workers strike, demanding higher wages
Rival tribes clash over raid on Modakeke village
Tribespeople protest non-payment of compensation by Shell
Rival tribes clash during run-off parliamentary elections
Citizens protest death of detained opposition leader
Oil workers kidnap foreign oil workers, demanding equal treatment
Herdsmen and farmers clash over land
Villagers protest oil spills and demand compensation
Rival tribes clash repeatedly, killing over 3000
Muslim youths riot, demanding release of jailed Muslim leader
Suspected rebels from neighboring states attack a luxury bus, killing 20.
Chadian rebels attack citizens and ransack houses.
protesters march in support of military government
itizens protest against military government
Students riot, protesting fuel shortages
Suspected rebels attack a bus in rural Nigeria, killing ten and looting the bodies.
Tribes clash over unspecified issues
Anti-drug officers and riot police clash over identification procedures
Citizens riot and attack police over fuel shortages
Pro-Abacha demonstrators rally at the football stadium
Pro-democracy demonstrators clash with police
Pro-democracy demonstrators clash with shop owners as they try to force them to close in protest
Bus drivers strike, demanding action be taken against gang violence on buses
Citizens riot, protesting the arrest of several opposition leaders and democracy activists
State security agents attack and jail a journalist and newspaper editor in response to election coverage
Citizens protest upcoming election, in which military leader is the only candidate
Citizens protest upcoming election, in which military leader is the only candidate
Citizens clash with police during anti-military rally
Students protest death of Abiola, former election winner, while still in police custody
Unemployed Yorubas attack Hausa youths after Yoruba leader died in custody
Rival student ethnically-based gangs clash on the university campus
Citizens protest at Belgian Embassy over death of Nigerian immigrant
Shiites protest detention of Islamic leader
Ogoni tribesmen protest Shell oil after rumors circulate about plans to re-introduce drilling in the area
Shiites protest detention of Islamic leader
Rival tribes clash over oil rights
Youths seize Shell relay stations, protesting governmental policies on oil
Public sector workers strike over wages, but the strike is very narrowly followed
Rival tribes clash over land disputes
Bank workers strike, demanding higher wages and better working conditions
Shell contract workers strike, demanding better working conditions and higher wages
Ogoni tribesmen protest Shell, and Ogoni youths take Shell workers hostage
Police storm a residence on a drill and kill three youths
Rival tribes clash at polling station, claiming the other rigged the vote
Muslim youths destroy a church because of its close proximity to a mosque
Youths take over Shell oil terminal
Public sector workers strike, demanding higher wages
Muslims protest close proximity of new church to mosque
Ijaw youths clash with soldiers, demanding they leave their land
Citizens clash with polling officials during local elections
Oil spill prompts community protests
Ijaw youths clash with security fores
Citizens clash with police during protest against Shell expansion plans
Tanker drivers threaten to strike unless cattle herders are banned from market.  Clashes ensue between the two groups
Party delegates attack leaders after private ballot held
Yoruba youths attack a police station with gasoline bombs
Rival student societies clash in gang-related violence
Police assault hotel manager and several guests in response to election protests
Yoruba youths clash with police over election violence
Rival tribes clash over land disputes
Citizens seize boats and pipeline facilities, demanding further compensation for previous oil spills
Football fans clash with police after loss
Labor union strikes, demanding an established minimum wage
Traders protest demolition of illegally constructed market stalls and clash with police
Citizens burn local officials' homes, demanding they adopt the minimum wage
Rival tribes clash and Itsekiri youths kidnap soldiers
Students kidnap electricity workers, protesting high prices and power outages
Rioting breaks out after rumors circulate that president has been injured
Rival tribes clash over land disputes
Bank workers strike, demanding higher wages and better working conditions
Minority Muslim sects clash with majority sect during protest over election of religious leader
Ijaw youths use speedboats to surround Itsekiri village and attack
Shell workers strike, demanding higher wages
Clashes sparked by report that trader allegedly killed by rancher, and rancher was no longer in police custody
Deputy governor's car attacked, and his aide killed over disputed election results
Emerging radical group attacks 61 Shell wells, protesting spills and lack of local compensation
Ethnic clashes erupt after Christian festival disrupted by Muslims
Ethnic riots spread to major city, as both groups attempt to capture people for human sacrifices
Broadcasting station workers strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens protest lawmaker furniture allowances
Citizens block supplies from oil platforms, protesting pollution and lack of economic compensation
Muslims riot, burning churches and hotels to protest the sale of alcohol and encourage its ban
Dock workers clash over union elections
University professors strike, demanding unpaid wages
Citizens attack offices of natural gas plant, demanding jobs
Teachers strike, demanding unpaid wages
Ijaw militants kidnap six Shell employees, demanding jobs and benefits from Shell
Christians march, protesting state adoption of Sharia law
Ijaw militants kidnap and kill policemen
Villages clash over non-payment of fishing royalties
Bus drivers strike, protesting extortion and harassment by Nigerian officials
Citizens gather to watch trial of ex-dictator's son and are violently dispersed by police
Muslims demonstrate in support of establishment of Sharia law
Rival tribes clash over use of pipes donated by oil company
Rival tribes clash over use of pipes donated by oil company
Clashes erupt between rival tribes over the control of the food market
Armed gunmen open fire on car carrying governor and other officials
Citizens protest plans to end subsidies holding down fuel prices
Muslims burn down Christian churches in protest of the death of a colleague
Yoruba-backed group clashes with rival ethnic groups in Lagos slums
Yoruba-backed group clashes with rival ethnic groups in Lagos slums
Yoruba separatists kidnap and execute a top police detective
Police shoot into crowd of youths holding sit-in at palace grounds of murdered village chief
Ticket sales organizers protest ongoing distribution problems of tickets
Football fans riot after draw with Congo
Tribes clash in border dispute
Muslims rally, demanding sharia law be extended to Kaduna state
Christians and Muslims clash during Christian protest gainst sharia law
Christians attack Muslims in neighboring Abia state in retaliation for the riot that left 400 dead
Rival tribes clash over disputed land
Workers strike, demanding higher wages
Muslims clash with Christians during rally demanding sharia law
Officials demand payment from motorists, prompting clashes between police and citizens
Youths kidnap 30 Shell workers and four police after Shell refused to tar their roads
Youths seize palace of emir, protesting his appointment against the citizens' will
Youths seize palace of emir, protesting his appointment against the citizens' will
Textile workers strike demanding higher wages and shorter working hours
Citizens protest Shell road project
Rival factions of drivers' union clash as they attempted to assert control over motor park
Muslims burn Christian church and Christians fight back
Students kill bus driver after he didn't have enough fuel to drive them. After hearing of this, townspeople attacked and killed the students.
Rival Yoruba communities clash over disputed land
Militant youths protest outside Elf residential compound
Youths take over Shell crude oil stations, protesting toxic dump sites
Citizens take over stadium and the Odua People's Congress block police from entering to hold Enahoro rally
Students protest cancellation of student elections
Rival factions of the group clash over building of a road
Rival factions of the Yoruba tribe clash over a land dispute
Youths clash with police during demonstration demanding students arrested in previous protest be released
Independence movement stages protests across Lagos
Youths clash over control of recently-created local government office
Biafra supporters rally, demanding independence
Christians clash after Muslims blamed for death of Christian man
An Ife principal is killed by his Modakeke neighbors, prompting clashes
Ibo tribesmen protest over alleged attempts to remove high-ranking fellow Ibo from office
Citizens protest hike in fuel prices
Citizens strike and riot over fuel prices
Citizens protest against failure of Italian oil company to uphold promises to develop community
Citizens protest power outages and vandalize National Electric Power Authority
Public sector workers strike, demanding the same wages as federal counterparts
Youths storm state legislative building in response to rumors that governor will be ousted
Supporters of rival candidates for chiftaincy clash during yam festival
Football fans riot after football team doesn't show for match
Rival factions of the Urhobo tribe clash
Police battle vigilante group
Residents of rival communities clash
Football players strike over unpaid wages
Students protest teachers' strike and clash with police
Citizens of Ondo state strike, demanding higher minimum wages
Youths kidnap 165 oil workers and hold them hostage
Students protest plans to oust Senate President on corruption allegations
Muslims protest visit of President Clinton, claiming he would oppose sharia law
Youths occupy Shell headquarters, demanding jobs
Teachers strike, demanding local governments match federal minimum wages
Newspaper workers from The Guardian strike, demanding higher wages
Youths protest around pumping stations, causing them to shut down
Christians and Muslims clash during protest over sharia law
Christians and Muslims clash over student elections
University students kidnap the vice chancelor over new fees imposed to pay for a previous riot
Doctors and health workers strike over unpaid wages
Oil workers strike, demanding higher wages
Rival factions of the Peoples Democratic Party clash over power struggles
Igbo tribesmen attack youths guilty of killing fellow Igbo
Odua People's Congress takes over filling stations in Lagos
Food and drink workers strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens kidnap Shell workers, demanding compensation for an oil spill
Communities clash over land dispute
Muslims march, demanding Nigeria cut ties with Israel
Vigilante group attacks suspected burglars and sets them on fire
Citizens attack man that allegedly turned two children into dogs.  Police intervene and kill two
Muslim Hausas and Christian Yorubas clash after Hausa guard killed allegedly by Yoruba youths
Gusau widows protest harssment from Islamic officials on marriage policies
Students protest, demanding legislators submit to corruption investigations
Police and citizens clash when police attempt to enforce new prohibition on alcohol under sharia law
Police and soldiers clash during sports festival after soldiers refuse to obey police orders
Muslims protest killing of Palestinians by Israel
Oil workers strike, demanding higher wages
Farmers attack cattle herders after a group of cattle wandered onto a farmer's crops
Citizens protest Nigerian minister after he allegedly left a pregnant woman to die after fatal car crash
Rival communities kidnap 20 members
Muslim youths burn Christian churches and beer parlors after a lunar eclipse
Football fans riot over free tee shirts, prompting police shooting
Referees boycott football games in protest of league procedures
protesters seize crude oil pumps, demanding Shell create jobs for them
Public sector workers strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens attack local officials as they attempt to mediate ethnic dispute
University professors strike, claiming the government reneged on service agreements
Prisoners riot, protesting lack of fundamental rights
protesters demand unpaid wages and are dispersed by police
Muslims protest visit of Israeli ambassador
Youths capture Shell pumping stations, demanding jobs and money
Agigim nomads attack a community allegedly responsible for the deaths of two Fulani
Labor union protests plans to deregulate the oil industry
Rival gangs believed to be political thugs clash
University professors strike, demanding their facilities b upgraded and wages raised
Muslim vigilante group protests slow implementation of sharia law
Rival tribes clash for three days
Airline employees protest proposed sale of the airline
Hisbah youths storm and torch a hotel suspected of hosting prostitutes
Clashes erupt after a Tarok man was killed picking mangos on a disputed farm.
Citizens attack members of three political parties, claiming irregularities in municipal elections
Students riot after being expelled for false credentials
Football fans riot after loss, stabbing referees
Shell contract workers strike, protesting poor working conditions
Bus drivers strike, protesting extortion by police and state officials
Health workers strike, demanding higher wages
Bank headquarters barricaded by union workers and protesters after all bank workers ordered to leave union
Bank headquarters barricaded by union workers and protesters after all bank workers ordered to leave union
Bank headquarters barricaded by union workers and protesters after all bank workers ordered to leave union
Christians and Muslims clash over Sharia law
Citizens protest after authorities demolished a slum, leaving 5000 people homeless
Students protest at constitutional meeting, rejecting the old constitution
Tribes clash after beheading of a traditional ruler
White collar oil workers strike, demanding higher wages
Christians burn mosques after bus driver insists males and females sit separately under sharia law, prompting mass killings
Nurses strike, demanding higher wages and better working conditions
Guardian employees strike, demanding better working conditions and higher wages
Vigilante group captures crime boss and publicly executes him in front of thousands of cheering citizens
Students clash over college union elections
An Islamic vigilante group attacks a wedding, outraged at the mixing of men and women
Fundamentalists clash with non-Muslims attempting to host a concert by a popular musician
Journalists protest by refusing to cover government activities due to harassment under sharia law
Citizens protest after judge hearing lawsuit against Pfizer fails to show and case is adjourned
Airport workers strike, demanding higher wages and better working conditions
Police detain members of vigilante group after they hold banned rally
Students' union clashes over elections
Citizens confront Shell team sent to clean up an oil spill and clash with police
Vigilante group clashes with police during banned meeting
Muslims protest detention of Islamic leader
Vigilante group crucifies and burns suspected robber
Youths take hostage dozens of oil workers at drilling site off the coast of Port Harcourt
Citizens protest visit of president of the Senate
Traders protest after robbers raid their shops, demanding local officials address crime
Rival tribes clash in land dispute
Muslims and Christians clash after Christian woman crosses street where Muslims are praying
Rival tribes clash over border dispute
Muslims protest recent death of Islamic militant
Youths attack Shell station and set it on fire
Truck drivers and truck owners clash over union rights
Political parties clash over Sharia law
Citizens protest American soldiers training in Nigeria
Muslims stage pro-bin Laden rally, supporting him in fight against US
Muslims protest US air strikes in Afghanistan
Christians and Muslims clash after Muslims protested US air strikes in Afghanistan
Fuel truck drivers strike, demanding higher wages and benefits
Students protest military attack on state
Soldiers attack six villages allegedly responsible for the deaths of 19 soldiers in previous ethnic conflicts
Rival communities clash over control of local government offic
University professors strike, demanding higher wages
Local government workers strike, demanding higher wages
Muslims and Christians clash over location of government office
Muslims protest US attacks on Afghanistan
Youths attack and kill police in retaliation for military massacre
Soldier kills Muslim worshippers after a confrontation with a Muslim cleric
Muslims attack Christian churches after police arrested Muslim preacher
University professors union calls strike, but few follow it
MOSOP protests conduct of representatives at house assembly
Fuel tanker drivers strike, demanding delivery fees be raised
Supporters of opposing candidates clash over suspension of Efinamya
Polytechnic teachers strike, demanding wages match university professors
Supporters of murdered man by political rivals prompts protest march
Tiv tribesmen ambush citizens returning from memorial of citizens murdered by Tivs
Youths burn police station after police refuse to hand over a ritual killer
Muslims gather to hold annual pro-Palestine rally
Bus and taxi drivers strike over hike in fuel prices
Farmers and nomads clash in land dispute
Youths riot to protest the arrest of suspects in killing of justice minister
Villagers and fishermen clash over fishing rights
Yoruba vigilante group attacks traditional leader's palace and clashes with guards
Citizens strike, protesting hike in fuel prices
Mob kills policemen after policeman allegedly assaulted an elderly man
Soldiers protest outside of parliament, claiming pensions have not been paid
Soldiers left homeless by munitions depot explosion protest quality of food aid
Police strike, demanding higher wages and better working conditions
Christians and Muslims clash after a man allegedly defecated on another's home
Supporters of rival candidates clash over nominations
Student activist murdered by other students
Students riot after teachers start strike
Teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Youths attack police station after police fail to respond when local bank robbed.  Police retaliate against students.
Football fans clash after loss
Students storm offices of People's Democratic Party demanding payment of allowances
Soldiers protest unpaid pensions by displaying body of starved soldier
Federal employees protest unpaid wages, blocking the governor's offices
Catholics protest ban on religious rally
Former government workers protest unpaid pensions, blocking entrance to the governor's office
Teachers strike in protest of the firing of 60 teachers at another university
Former government employees protest unpaid pensions and block entrance to Lagos parliament
OPC attack several students involved in plotting violence against rival ethnic groups
Youths kidnap Shell workers,demanding jobs and compensation for drilling
Muslims protest Israeli invasion of Palestine
Students clash with police during protest of school closure
NLC pickets major firms, demanding temporary workers be given equal benefits as full-time workers
Youths kidna oil workers, demanding jobs and compensation for drilling
Violence erupts during PDP meeting on potential election candidates
Rival communities clash over land disputes
Students protest hike in education fees and the expulsion of fellow students for cheating
Railway workers strike, protesting unpaid wages
Citizens attack and damage power stations after power outages affected the broadcasting of World Cup matches
Fulani nomads attacked community in revenge for killing cows
Citizens protest governmental ruling that no percentage of oil revenues belong to states
Magistrates strike after colleague murdered, demanding government provide better security
Christians and Muslims clash and burn churches and mosques
Violence erupts during PDP primary
Groups protest newly passed safety legislation
PDP members storm police station to free political prisoners
Female protesters take over oil stations, demanding their sons be hired and electricity be provided to their villages
Students set four alleged cult members on fire in retaliation for abduction of female student
Rival factions of the PDP clash during election primaries
Tribes clash after after security personnel went on strike over non-payment of wages
Students kidnap deputy governor and burn government buses after colleague killed by police
Contract workers strike, demanding higher wages
NLC pickets major firms, demanding temporary workers be given equal benefits as full-time workers
Community clashes over rumored disbursement of oil money
Youths throw stones at presidential motorcade, prompting police shootings
Mob attacks and kills two suspected ritual killers
Bread vendors strike, protesting prices of flour
Police attempt crackdown on vigilante group
protesters gather outside ChevronTexaco headquarters, demanding compensation and jobs
protesters take over ChevronTexaco station, demanding compensation for drilling and jobs
Bakassi Boys attack high-profile critic of vigilante groups, killing him and his wife
Students protest failure to re-enroll students expelled for allegedly kidnapping vice-chancellor
Rioters loot a Lagos factory after accidental fire in response to rumors that staff burned to death after managers trapped them inside
Lawyers strike for one day, protesting recent murder of colleague and police failure
Thousands of Abacha supporters protest arrest of Abacha's son
Militant youths take over multiple oil stations, demanding jobs
Unidentified gunmen kill leading candidate from opposing political party
Oil workers strike, protesting privatisation plans of state-run petroleum company and filling stations
Abacha supporters celebrate release of Abacha's son
Rival communities clash after Kanams accuse Langtangs of killing their cows
Fighting breaks out as transport unions clash over control of central bus station
Tribes clash over dead cows
Egbema youths take over Shell station, protesting failure of Shell to reconcile electricity bills
Police kill taxi driver after he refused to pay a bribe, prompting rioters to attack police. Police then kill two other rioters.
Tribes clash in revenge killings
Railway workers strike, protesting unpaid wages
Muslims attack police station, protesting Miss World pageant.Riots erupt after newspaper article printed claiming Muhammad would have supported event.
Muslims attack police station, protesting Miss World pageant.Riots erupt after newspaper article printed claiming Muhammad would have supported event.
Nigerians march in support of Palestine on Jerusalem Day
Civil servants kill their boss over unpaid wages
Citizens hijack two boats belonging to Shell
Youths riot after governor announces bid for reelection
Supporters of rival gubernatorial candidates clash over elections
Citizens block entrance to government ministries, protesting non-payment of state pensions
Teachers strike, protesting poor education funding
Citizens protest Obasanjo's reelection bid
Stranded passengers march through airport, protesting state-run airline delays
Chadian rebels attack and rob buses, killing three.
Muslims protest rumors of U.S. invasion in Iraq, claiming human rights abuses and anti-Muslim sentiment from US
NLC pickets major firms, demanding temporary workers be given equal benefits as full-time workers
Rivl youths clash over state legislative primaries
Clashes between nomads and herdsmen erupt over livestock dispute
Citizens protest Obasanjo's visit, demanding he give up candidacy
Oil workers strike in sympathy with Department of Petroleum workers, demanding higher wages for everyone involved
Dock workers and police clash during protest against police brutality
Temporary workers strike, demanding unpaid wages
Nomads clash with community over land dispute
Citizens protest opposition leader's death, alleging ruling party ordered it
Senior opposition official murdered a month before elections
Supporters of opposing political parties clash over elections
Nomads and farmers clash in land dispute
Bus drivers clash with local gang after they refuse to pay bribes
Ijaws and soldiers clash after soldiers accuse them of attempting to disrupt oil production.  Clash continues after Ijaws accuse Itsekiris of conspiring with soldiers
Rival political groups burn over 200 homes in riot
Hisbah law enforcers protest police interference with enforcng strict Islamic law
Rioters burn traditional ruler's home, protesting  vigilante groups and lack of police forc
Relatives of politicians killed by hired political thugs
Opposing political parties clash ahead of elections
Tribes clash in revenge killings
Rival political parties clash over pending elections
Rioters burn homes of key supporters of President, alleging ballot-rigging
Protest over firing due to alleged theft turns violent as workers take hostages aboard rigs
Citizens clash with police on election day
Women protest murder of top female local politician
Rival political parties of gubernatorial candidates clash over allegations of rigging elections
Ijaw militants attack oil pipeline
protesters burn tires and put up barricades in attempts to block president from being sworn in
Aviation workers protest planned liquidation of airline
Christian youths set mosques on fire after Christian woman killed by Muslim man over commercial dispute
Citizens protest hike in fuel prices
Ijaw militants kidnap oil workers, demanding ransom
Citizens strike and protest hike in fuel prices. Riot erupts on July 7 between parties wanting to end strike and parties wanting to continue.
Students march in front of U.S. Embassy, calling on Bush to cancel his visit
Women occupy Shell pipeline, demanding they keep promises of providing jobs
Citizens protest Bush's visit to Nigeria
Relatives of a journalist murdered in Nigeria protest government's offer of asylum to Liberian president
Itsekiri youths attack Ijaws, prompting retaliation
Group claiming to represent Ijaw interests kidnaps ChevronTexaco worker to urge them to side with Ijaws in ongoing dispute
Police disperse mechanics who have set up shop illegally, killing one and prompting a riot.
Truck drivers strike, protesting impoundment of their vehicles in dispute over traffic congestion
Rival tribes clash over ethnic issues
White-collar workers strike, protesting transferring jobs to other countries
White-collar workers strike, protesting transferring jobs to other countries
White-collar workers strike, protesting transferring jobs to other countries
Citizens block Shell employees' access to oil explosion, demanding compensation for the spill
Citizens go on hunger strike to protest stoning sentence of woman
Citizens protest villages flooding after hydroelectric dam released
Citizens protest poor mobile phone service by turning off mobile phones
Football fans attack referees after football game
Lower house of parliament goes on strike to protest high prices of fuel
Bus drivers protest law forbidding them to drive in rich districts
Citizens protest hike in fuel prices
Anglicans protest U.S., British and other stances on homosexual bishops
Rival ethnic groups clash after Ijaws attacked Itsekiris
Rival gangs clash
Football fans protest decision not to appoint favored coach
Group commemorates death of activist and demands Shell pay compensation for ruining Ogoniland
Ethnic militants kidnap ChevronTexaco workers, demanding jobs and compensation for oil
Christians and Muslims clash and burn mosques and churches
Militants kidnap oil workers demanding ransom
Ijaw militants kidnap oil workers, demanding ransom
Citizens protest involvement of Nigeria in Commonwealth summit
Rival ethnic groups clash after Itsekiri militants invade villages
Itsekiris attack passenger boat, killing one
Police raid Islamic schools, suspecting outlawed sect was hiding there
Muslims attack police station after police raid on Islamic schools
Religious sect attacks police station
Citizens attack sect attempting to establish Taliban-like rule
Citizens attack sect attempting to establish Taliban-like rule
Ethnic tribes clash
Crowds gather for AIDS awareness concert and youths storm the stage, prompting riots
Victim's family attacks local leader's home after rumors surface that victim's body was found inside
Rival street gangs fight in territory dispute
Workers protest fuel taxes
Rival political parties clash over local election
Citizens strike, protesting new fuel taxes
Itsekiris attack Ijaws
Rival factions of tribe clash
Militants kidnap oil workers, demanding jobs and ransom
Rival tribes clash
Prisoners riot over poor living conditions and lack of trials
Christian tribes attack Muslim tribe
Christians attack Muslims
Muslims attack police, claiming they did not do enough to prevent Christian militia attack
Airway workers protest liquidation of national airline
Muslim militants attack Christian village
Gunmen attack Governor and associates belonging to Peoples Democratic Party
Gunmen attack local politicians in hopes of disrupting polls
Gunmen attack local politicians in hopes of disrupting polls
Rival factions of vigilante group clash
Ijaw militants attack soldiers
Gunmen attack naval chief of staff, killing his driver
Students protest replacement of the university's provost
Rival ethnic groups clash over land dispute
Rival political party supporters clash leading up to elections
Muslims hold demonstration supporting government's decision to reject UN-administered polio vaccine.  Police storm demonstration.
Oppostion party supporters clash, alleging fraudulent election results
Airway workers stage sit-in at UN headquarters demanding refugee status in their own country, claiming their country abandoned them
Food workers strike, demanding higher wages
Clashes break out after herdsmen accuse farmers of stealing cows
Villagers seize Shell pipeline, demanding they build roads to their remote village
Rival politica party supporters clash in schoollyard
Muslims protest Israel's killing of Hamas leader
Citizens attack man who allegedly murdered a youth, prompting riots that kill an additional 4
Christian Taroks attack Muslim Fulanis
Itsekiris attack boat filled with Ijaw vendors
Herdsmen clash with farmers
Christians and Muslims clash
Citizens march, demanding president's resignation
Christians attack Muslim village
Fulani herders clash with farmers after raiding their farmlands
Muslim protest against violence becomes attack on Christians in revenge of previous massacre
Pro-democracy activists demand president's resignation at march
Youths attack soldiers
Militants attack local village
Muslims attack Christians in continued series of violence
2004 Nigeria Government
Soldiers launch offensive against militants hiding in small village
Rival cults clash, killing two
Citizens strike, protesting hike in fuel prices
Christians and Muslims clash over location of new mosque
Nurses strike, demanding higher wages
Rival cults clash, killing three
Shell workers strike, protesting rumors of job cuts
Shell workers strike, protesting rumors of job cuts
Shell workers strike, protesting rumors of job cuts
Air Force officers clash with police after preventing them from arresting burglary suspects
Oil workers held hostage on rig after labor dispute
Medicine shop owners protest closure of their shops
Rival cult fraternities clash, battling for campus supremacy
Newspaper workers strike, demanding unpaid wages
Villagers supporting rival candidates for chieftancy clash
Labour union meets to protest, but is told their march will be violently dispersed if they continue
2004 Nigeria Government
Shell workers strike, protesting rumors of job cuts
Citizens strike, protesting hike in fuel prices
Citizens march in support of planned general strike to protest high fuel prices
Citizens clash with troops during an invasion of an oil company to demand jobs
Emerging militant group attacks NDPVF
Citizens protest rising fuel costs and attempt to mobilise support for general strike
Rival gangs clash on university campus
Gunmen attack state parliament, legislator's homes and governor's office and home, setting them ablaze
Muslims kill man after he allegedly defiled Koran
Muslims attack Kalakato sect during organised open-air preaching in which they are labeled heretics
Villagers attack oil rig, protesting company's failure to invest in their community
Doctors strike, demanding unpaid wages
MOSOP protests alleged continued presence of Shell in Ogoni regions.  Protesters allege security forces regularly commit crimes against Ogonis
Citizens invade three oil pumping facilities from two companies, holding workers hostage
Fighting erupts after Christian student shares Christian texts with a Muslim student
Shell workers strike, demanding higher wages and benefits
Militants kidnap oil workers, protesting failure of Shell to uphold promises to invest in local communities
Villagers take over Shell station after generator Shell supplied broke down
Police kill driver who refused to pay bribes, prompting a riot
Villagers seize Shell oil station, protesting management of hospitals and schools
Gunmen attack group of citizens, including local politicians, attempting to mediate land dispute
Herdsmen and farmers clash in land dispute
Villagers seize oil station, demanding jobs be created for Nigerians
Farmers and herders clash over land
Youths protest, demanding  government end violent land dispute
Outlawed vigilante group clashes with polic
Lebanese citizens protest assassination of former prime minister
Rival Muslim sects clash after evening prayers
Villagers attempt to displace miners, demanding they be allowed to run mines themselves
Citizens torch police station after police kill a bus driver when he refused to pay bribes
Togolese stage pro-democracy march in Nigeria
Villagers protest fact that only Edagbari Village receives oil money
Edagbari villagers respond to protests about their receipt of oil aid with bloody raid on villages
Rival university gangs clash, killing three
Sunni Muslims attack Shiite Muslims
Truck drivers strike after police impound their vehicles
State media workers strike, demading unpaid wages
Citizens protest alleged crimes committed by police and are violently dispersed
Togolese protest installation of new president at Togolese Embassy
Muslims clash after evening prayers
Supporters of militia leader gather to demand secession of Niger Delta
Youths protest lack of jobs, leading to death of protester.  Riots erupt as a result, leading to youths torching police station
Citizens protest planned relocation of shell headquarters from Warri to Port Harcourt
Street gang clashes with soldiers in Lagos
Villagers demand Shell stop oil production until roads are built to villages
Shia and Sunni Muslims clash over torched seminary
Sunni Muslims torch government building after leading cleric arrested
Citizens rally for new party demanding violence be stopped
Traders riot and torch police station after police allegedly kill traders
Ijaw militants kidnap oil workers, protesting failure of oil companies to invest in communities
Students torch home of Odua Peoples Congress official, protesting their killing sprees.  Clashes between the two erupt.
Activists demand oil companies give Nigerians a larger portion of profit
Robbers attack truck drivers on roads, killing 38 and stealing their freight
Citizens of rival groups clash during festival
Bakers strike, protesting high prices of flour and sugar
Youths protest unfair job opportunities at national natural gas plant
Supporters of rival political parties clash over local council poll
Niger Delta delegates boycott reform talks, protesting lack of governmental response to demands for 25% oil compensation
Thousands gather in support of segregation of sexes law on public transportation
Akabuka villagers demand jobs from newly planned development by Total
Villagers demand compensation for oil spills
Ex-soldiers protest lack of pension payments
Ex-soldiers protest lack of pension payments
Students protest high fuel prices
Citizens attack Shell logistics base, protesting cut in power supply
Group clashes with police during protest demanding autonomy
Communities clash over vacant council position
Citizens protest high fuel prices
Citizens protest high fuel prices
Niger Delta militants protest arrest of their leader and demand autonomy
Prison workers beat journalists attempting to write story on detained students
Supporters of removing traditional rulers clash with his supporters
Prisoners' protest of living conditions becomes a riot, in which 100 inmates escape
Citizens protest high fuel prices
Soldiers attack police in dispute over bribes
Doctors and nurses strike, demanding higher wages.  They are all dismissed eventually.
Muslims march in support of anti-Israel comments made by Iran's President
Supporters of rival political parties clash over local council poll
Secessionists torch home of former president in protest for autonomy
Detained Niger Delta warlord goes on hunger strike to protest being held without being charged
Judges strike, demanding higher wages
Airway workers of liquidated airline protests unpaid pensions
Ogoni people march on anniversary of activist's death, protesting continued persecution of Ogoni people
Youths protest return of fugitive governor
Prisoners riot, protesting poor conditions
Journalists strike, protesting unpaid wages
Separatist movement protests detention of leader with two-day strike and clashes with police
Farmers and herders clash over land
Moped drivers protest new law forbidding women to drive mopeds due to immodesty
Women protest frequent plane crashes and danger of airlines
Police shoot citizens attempting to vandalise pipelines
Gunmen suspected to be supporters of opposing political parties attack legislators
Doctors strike, demanding unpaid wages and benefits
Secessionist group attacks pipeline, clashes with police and takes four British and American hostages
Secessionist group attacks pipeline, clashes with police and takes four British and American hostages
Group protests removal of state governor
Citizens burn headquarters of vice president's campaign as he visited wife of stabbing victim, claiming he was attempting to intimidate her into silence
Lawmakers burn Danish flags and prevent Danish companies from bidding on construction projects in response to publication of cartoons depicting Muhammad
Army helicopter exchanges fire with militants
Muslims attack Christians over cartoons depicting Muhammad
Muslims attack Christians over cartoons depicting Muhammad
Muslims attack Christians over cartoons depicting Muhammad
Muslims attack Christians over cartoons depicting Muhammad
Secessionist group attacks oil pipelines, taking hostage nine foreign workers
Christians burn mosques in retaliation for Muslim attacks over Danish cartoon
Muslim and Christian refugees clash after fleeing violence
Youth protest third term for president
Lawyers strike, protesting lack of rights provided by courts
Census workers riot, protesting receiving lower wages than their city counterparts
Rival ethnic groups clash over census plans
Secessionist group attacks police, demanding they be exempt from census
Secessionist group attacks police, demanding they be exempt from census
Rival ethnic groups clash over land dispute
Youths protest president's plans to run for a third term
MEND car bombs kills two
University professors strike, demanding government adherence to new pay agreement
MEND detonates a car bomb near an oil refinery.
Youths protest outside ExxonMobil in job disagreement
Shia Muslims attack Sunnis after Sunni men allegedly rape Shia women
Secessionist group targets oil companies with kidnappings and car bombs
State telephone workers strike, demanding unpaid wages
Secessionist group attacks prisons to set detained members free
MEND kidnaps two Filipino oil workers.
Rival factions of political party clash
Secessionist group kidnaps oil workers
Police attempts to chase secessionist group out of city
MEND attacks two oil installations.
Secessionist group attacks police station, killing two officers and freeing 14 prisoners
Students clash with police in university's French 'village'
Supporters of murdered gubernatorial candidate riot, protesting murder and its impact on democracy
MEND gunmen kidnap 4 foreign oil workers.
Lebanese community protests Israeli attacks on Hezbollah militia
Oil tanker drivers strike, protesting failure of oil companies to honor agreements reached with road transport owners
Militants kidnap foreign oil workers, demanding ransom and percentages of oil profits
Telecommunication workers strike over non-payment of wages
PDP supporters riot after gubernatorial candidate murdered
MEND gunmen attack a police station, killing three officers.
MEND gunmen kidnap two foreigners and kill one soldier in a gunbattle.
Soldiers attack citizens after militants killed a soldier
Bus drivers protest extortion attempts by local police
Militants attack oil workers, killing one
Oil workers strike, protesting escalating violence in Niger Delta region and failure of both oil companies and Nigerian government to solve it
Muslim youths protest and riot over Christian woman's blasphemous remarks against prophet Mohammed
MEND gunmen attack two military patrol boats, killing 5 soldiers.
Niger Delta militants attack convoys and kidnap several oil workers
Teachers strike over plans to privatize several schools
Citizens stage protest of governors impeachment
Villagers occupy three Shell oil stations and an Agip station, protesting failure to provide promised aid
Youths attack police after alleged raid on hotel
Police attack vice president supporters outside of his official residence due to deteriorating relations between the president and vice president
Rival factions of the PDP clash at start of election nominations
Niger Delta militants attack oil eport terminal, kiling one and set off simultaneous car bombs.They also later target offices of local officials after gubernatorial elections canceled
Gubernatorial election cause cashes among several groups nationwide
MEND set a car bomb outside a state governor's office.
Communal clashes in Ogoniland erupt over a parcel of land
Village elders are attacked on a riverboat after citizens branded them uncaring and acused them of siding with the oil companies
Former soldiers protest non-payment of pensions
Neighboring communities clash over an area of land
Neighboring communities clash over an area of land
Militants attack oil workers, police and local buildings.
Clashes over oil revene erupt among vilagers, killing several.
Citizens protest exclusion of vice president on ballot due to alleged corruption
Court workers strike, demanding higher wages and benefits
Secesionist group kidnaps citizens
Muslim students lynch their Chrstian teacher after she allegedly desecrated the Koran
Families clash over disputed land
University professors strike, demanding higher wages
Rival political party supporters clash leading up to elections
Islamic militants attack radio station accused of broadcasting conflicting views on an  Islamic holiday
Rival gangs clash
Militants attack citizens and clash with police as they attempt to vote on election day
Citizens clash on election day, killing several
Citizens protest after several pictures of candidates left off of ballot
After elections, Islamic militants attack police station
Police attack Islamicarea of town after Islamic militants attacked police station
Militants attack oil workers and bomb local buildings
Unidentified militants attack electoral headquarters and ambush police
Youths protest election results, claiming they were rigged
Women's rights group protests election rigging and demands new vote
Protesters take over Chevron station, demanding shares of oil profits
MEND blows up country home of the vice president, killing two police in the process
Nigerian oil unions strike, protesting plans to sell government refineries
Citizens strike, protesting flawed elections and hold protest at inauguration of new president
Youths block road to protest kidnappings and violence
Protesters occupy Chevron offices to demand jobs
Villagers take over oil transfer stations, demanding money they claim is owed to them by the oil companies
Citizens strike, protesting government price hikes of fuel
Soldiers attack militants holding workers and soldiers hostage in an oil installation
Rival gangs clash in Ogoniland
Rival Muslim sects clash after shooting of popular cleric
Police raid Muslim homes in response to sectarian violence, killing one and arresting over 100
MPs of Bayelsa state go on a hunger strike to protest kidnapping of one of their members and mother of assembly's president
Assailants suspected to be hired by the government torch compounds and homes that house Shiite Muslims
Rival gangs clash in Port Harcourt for 5 days, leaving several dead. Clashes evolve into heavy shooting wars with soldiers
Inmates riot and attack wardens, protesting inhumane living conditions
Mob attempts to lynch homosexuals in custody after charges of homosexuality, which carry the death penalty, are substituted for idleness
Sunni Muslims hack a Shiite follower to death
Prisoners attempt to escape, protesting poor living conditions
Students riot after fees raised, prompting university closing
Chevron workers strike, protesting violence in region
Steel workers kidnap Indians to demand higher wages
Youths clash with palace guards during protest over woman's murder for ritual purposes
Citizens march, demanding lawmaker resign over corruption scandal
Newspaper workers strike, demanding higher wages
Rival political parties clash following weekend council elections
Clashes erupt during local governmental polls
Niger Delta Vigilante Movement attacks a hotel lobby and a police station, killing 13.
Niger Delta militants attack police stations and hotels
Justices strike, demanding promised pay raise
Gunmen hijack a vessel belonging to a construction company and take several Nigerians hostage.
MEND gunmen seize a small boy, injuring his mother and killing their guard and driver.
Tribes clash over appointing local leader
Youths occupy Shell stations, demanding promised aid
Niger Delta militants sabotageShell  pipeline
Muslims protest alleged blasphemy of prophet by a Christian trader and torch several Christian homes and businesses
ExxonMobil workers strike, protesting poor living conditions and demanding higher wages
MEND gunmen attack a police sttion, killing five officers and stealing weapons.
MEND gunmen kill 2 police officers in an attack on a police station and steal weapons.
Bakers strike, protesting high flour and sugar prices
MEND gunmen attack an oil-industry security vessel, killing one.
Teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Rival gangs clash for supremacy in Niger Delta region
Chevron workers strike, demanding Chevron hire senior exeutive with anti-labour practices
MEND gunmen attack a military location, wounding soldiers and beheading a civilian. Two gunmen were killed.
Teachers strike, demanding government implement previously agreed upon pay raise
Niger Delta militants call off temporary ceasefire after Britain backs Nigerian government
Truck drivers strike to protest high fuel prices
Rival Niger Delta militants clash for supremacy
MEND militants attack an oil ship, killing a sailor guarding the vessel.
MEND attacks multiple oil facilities after declaring an 'all-out war' on oil companies.
The 86 wives of one Muslim man protest his arrest for unlawful marriages and contempt of Islamic la
Emir gifts cars to several chieftains, prompting poverty-stricken youths to attack motorcade
Niger Delta militants attack and kidnap foreigners
Muslims and Christians clash over elections
Police raid village in an attempt to find militants
MEND gunmen attack an oil company, but three militants are killed and six others captured in the attack.
Pirates attack ships off the coast of Nigeria
Muslims protest Israeli bombings on Gaza
MEND gunmen rob an offshore oil platform.
Niger Delta militants attack and kidnap oil workers, police and pipelines
Citizens torch two patrol officers after awaiting contraband rice being smuggled into the country
Total oil workers strike, protesting kidnappings and violence by militants
Freight and forwarding agents and dockworkers strike, protesting high charges and cargo congestion in Lagos
Muslims and Christians argue over parking cars outside a Christian church
Niger Delta gang clashes with football club members, killing 13
Rival university gangs clash, killing 15
Teachers srike, demanding higher wages
Football fans attack officials and visiting team after match tied
MEND gunmen attack a naval station, leaving one soldier dead. Nine militants were killed.
Truck drivers strike after Lagos police impound several trucks and refuse to release them
Doctors in Lagos hospitals strike, demanding higher wages and better equipment
Labor union marches in Lagos, demanding new elections and accusing current president of undemocratic behavior
Soldiers raid militant compound to rescue several foreign hostages and wage campaign to inflict severe casualties on militant group
Student protest over failure to receive state-supplied books turns violent as students take teachers hostage
Woman's murder prompts clashes between rival ethnic groups
University professors strike, demanding higher wages
Public television and radio workers strike, demanding unpaid wages
MEND conducts first strike outside of Niger Delta, blowing up a fuel jetty and clashing with naval forces
2009 Nigeria Government
Soldiers attack Islamic compound in reprisal for previous killings
Health workers strike, demanding higher wages
Militants protest over failure of government to compensate them for turning in their arms
Lagos teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Labor unions stage rally protesting deregulatio of oil sector
Youths attack police after vigilante group kills one of their group.  Police are accused of not properly controlling the area
MEND breaks three-month ceasefire agreement and attacks oil pipeline
Nomads attack farmers after clash over land
Islamic militants attack police, demanding release of their arrested leader
Two Chevron Corp contractors were shot dead by soldiers after a disagreement, prompting rioting by Chevron workers.
MEND gunmen attack Chevron oil pipeline.
Citizens gather to protest long absence of ill president, challenging his ongoing authority.
MEND gunmen kidnap three Brits and a Colombian, killing their police escort.
Christian youths protest building of a new mosque, resulting in rioting and attacking of Muslim mosques and homes.
MEND gunmen attack Shell oil pipeline.
A new rebel group attacks a major Shell pipeline.
Ex-rebels protest government failure of amnesty program, claiming they had been forgotten.
Activists protest presence of Bush and Blair at an awards ceremony for a Nigerian activist.
Sports journalists kidnapped soon after ceasefire agreement with MEND discarded.
JRC fighters attack an Agip pipeline.
New militant goup attacked Shell pipelines.
Muslims avenge previous attack, massacring Christians before dawn.
Christian youths attacked Muslim reporters as they attempted to cover mass funerals.
Protesters demand to see ill president after his long absence, as well as demand new ministers following sectarian violence.
Soldiers fired on youths that circled a patrol truck. Families later claimed the youths were worried the truck was distributing weapons.
Christian women protest sectarian violence, demanding better protection from the state.
MEND gunmen kidnap and kill two white-collar oil workers.
Communities clash over the planned building of a new school, torching several homes.
Communities clash over the planned building of a new school, torching several homes.
MEND sets off two bombs as talks begin to pursue peace in the southern region
Muslims attack a Christian village in retaliation for previous attacks, cutting out most of their victims' tongues.
JRC militants attack a main oil pipeline.
White-collar oil workers protest the kidnapping deaths of two workers by MEND gunmen and demand the government arrest those responsible.
Ex-rebels march, protesting non-payment of payouts in the amnesty agreement.
Protesters march, demanding electoral reform before the next elections and demanding the current head of the INES not be reappointedl.
A youth protest against a police killing turns violent, and police shoot live rounds to disperse the group, killing two.
Muslims attack Christian youths returning from a church rally, killing one.
MEND gunmen kidnap four foreign oil workers, killing a policeman in the process.
Youths hold a march to demand clean elections.
Muslims kidnap and kill a Christian pastor and his wife.
Muslim nomads attack Christian farmers.
MEND gunmen abduct two German tourists.
Christians attack Muslim nomads, avenging a previous attack on Christian farmers.
Inmates riot, protesting slow prosecution and poor living conditions.
Muslims attack Christian youths in retaliation for the death of a Muslim teenager, allegedly killed by a Christian. Journalists attempting to cover the clashes are also killed.
Women groups staged a protest, demanding a Senator alleged to have married a 13-year-old Egyptian be investigated.
JRC militants attack a main oil pipeline.
Gunmen kidnap four officers responsible for combatting counterfeit pharmaceuticals and for placing twelve suspects on trial.
MEND militants set a car bomb near properties owned by the deputy governor.
Court workers strike, demanding higher wages.
MEND gunmen kidnap four Lebanese road construction workers, killing a police officer, soldier and civilian in the process. One gunmen also died.
Christians kill Muslim herdsmen after they entered a primarily Christian village.
Muslims attack Christians in a revenge killing.
MEND gunmen claim they engaged a military joint task force in a gun battle, killing four soldiers.
Pirates kidnap sailors off of Nigeria's coast in search of their cargo.
Niger Delta militants protest alleged favoritism in the amnesty process.
MEND gunmen kidnap journalists.
Christians, angry about the location of a mosque, torch it and clash with Muslims.
Muslims attack a Christian village in retaliation for previous attacks.
Shiite Muslims protest the detaining of fellow Shia after the killing of a cleric. The protest is attacked by Sunni Muslims.
Unknown attackers toss an explosive at the window of the deputy governor's residence.
Tanker drivers suspend the supply of oil to Abuja to protest the state of the country's roads.
Christians attack a police station, demanding the police produce five Muslim prisoners.
Supporters of rival political parties clash while hanging up campaign posters.
Supporters of rival political parties clash at a polling station.
Women block access to a natural gas pipeline to protest poor living conditions in their community.
Supporters of rival political candidates clash.
Supporters of rival gubernatorial candidates clash at a wedding, seriously injuring several.
Gunmen kidnap the 10-year-old son of a local candidate running for election.
Unknown attackers kill the leader of a gang accused of rigging the 2007 election.
Electric workers strike, protesting unpaid allowances.
Women protest against the government's neglect of their community, blocking access to Shell facilities.
Unknown gunmen wage a campaign of kidnappings and murder directed toward local politicians.
Catholics march in support of free and fair elections.
Doctors strike, demanding the government better protect them from kidnappings.
Gunmen battle soldiers in an attempt to take over an offshore oil rig. 3 foreigners are kidnapped.
Gunmen kidnap several foreign school children.
MEND set off car bombs during a celebration of the country's 50th independence anniversary.
Gunmen kidnap the principal of a school sponsored by Exxon Mobil, killing two police in the process.
Clashes over land erupt between rival communities.
Christians and Muslims clash.
MEND militants attack oil pipelines.
MEND militants bomb a government-run hotel.
Gunmen kidnap five foreign oil workers from an offshore oil rig.
Trade unions strike, demanding the minimum wage be raised.
Armed men target the house of a top presidential adviser on the amnesty programme for ex-rebels.
MEND gunmen kidnap several.
MEND militants sabotage a state-run oil pipeline.
Gas tanker drivers strike, protesting police harassment.
Soldiers raid MEND camps.
ExxonMobil employees strike after dozens of local workers are laid off.
Protesters march after a police allegedly killed a man while he was driving.
Niger Delta Liberation Force militants attack a state-run pipeline and ambush soldiers.
Niger Delta Liberation Force militants attack three pipelines operated by foreign companies.
Bombs explode in Jos during Christmas Eve.
Youths barricade roads and attack citizens days after bombs killed dozens.
Unknown bombers attack a political rally.
Gunmen assassinate a human rights campaigner.
An explosion injures several at an army barracks.
Police chase a member of a radical Islamic sect accused of a rash of targeted killings into a cinema, where they open fire, killing three.
Christian youths attack a car full of Muslims returning from a wedding.  Sectarian riots follow.
Gunmen open fire on a ceremony welcoming a former presidential adviser on the region back home.
Gunmen suspected to be part of a radical Muslim sect attack a church and kill a policeman.
Christians protest the fact that Muslims would be conducting voter registration.  Riots ensue.
A dispute over a game of billiards erupts into sectarian violence.
Pirates attack a ship in port and abduct two sailors.
Sectarian riots occur.  The police open fire, prompting student protests in retaliation.
Three are killed in religious violence.
Sectarian violence occurs.
Cattle rustlers invade a soil conservation college and steal a herd of cattle belonging to one of the students.
Four people are killed and decapitated in a mysterious attack.
A riot erupts at a presidential speech.  11 are stampeded to death.
Sectarian clashes erupt.
Sectarian clashes erupt.
A stabbing triggers pandemonium and rioting in a market.
Gunmen attack a bank.
A wave of explosions occur at the offices of the opposition Labour Party.
Cattle thieves attack a village; the villagers blame Muslim herdsmen.
A pre-dawn attack occurs in Dabwak, a mainly Christian village.
Assailants toss a bomb at an election rally from a moving car.  They miss their target, instead hitting a roadside vegetable market.
Fulani attackers burn Sayawa houses.
Attackers invade a village, killing 5 members of a family.  Nothing was stolen or destroyed.
Unknown gunmen storm Christian villages, killing 6 and stealing 37 head of cattle.
A botched bombing near a church kills two people.
A riot erupts in a dispute over the location of an election rally.
Muslim attackers storm Christian villages.
Hundreds pour into the streets and riot to protest the desecration of the Koran by a Muslim man believed to be suffering from mental illness.
A bomb explodes at the offices of an opposition party.
A bomb explodes as two men try to move it to another location.
Gunmen attack a police station where election officials were collecting poll materials.
A bomb explodes at an election office.
Several incidents of bombing and gunfire occur on election day.
Bombers throw grenades at civilians and police on election day.
A bomb explodes at a hotel.
The election victory of president Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian, sparks rioting in the Muslim north.  Hausa and Muslim mobs attack ruling party supporters, and Christians stage reprisal attacks.   74,000 are displaced by the rioting.
The election victory of president Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian, sparks rioting in the Muslim north.  Hausa and Muslim mobs attack ruling party supporters, and Christians stage reprisal attacks.   74,000 are displaced by the rioting.
The election victory of president Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian, sparks rioting in the Muslim north.  Hausa and Muslim mobs attack ruling party supporters, and Christians stage reprisal attacks.   74,000 are displaced by the rioting.
The election victory of president Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian, sparks rioting in the Muslim north.  Hausa and Muslim mobs attack ruling party supporters, and Christians stage reprisal attacks.   74,000 are displaced by the rioting.
The election victory of president Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian, sparks rioting in the Muslim north.  Hausa and Muslim mobs attack ruling party supporters, and Christians stage reprisal attacks.   74,000 are displaced by the rioting.
The election victory of president Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian, sparks rioting in the Muslim north.  Hausa and Muslim mobs attack ruling party supporters, and Christians stage reprisal attacks.   74,000 are displaced by the rioting.
The election victory of president Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian, sparks rioting in the Muslim north.  Hausa and Muslim mobs attack ruling party supporters, and Christians stage reprisal attacks.   74,000 are displaced by the rioting.
The election victory of president Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian, sparks rioting in the Muslim north.  Hausa and Muslim mobs attack ruling party supporters, and Christians stage reprisal attacks.   74,000 are displaced by the rioting.
A wave of bomb blasts occurs in Maiduguri.
Gunmen storm a polling station and steal the ballots.
Sectarian violence occurs; invaders attack a Christian town.
Unspecified militants exchange fire with army troops.
Gunmen storm an apartment and abduct two European construction workers.
Gunmen on motorcycles kill two police guards attached to a government official.
Bombs explode throughout the country just hours after the president's inauguration.
Bombs explode throughout the country just hours after the president's inauguration.
Bombs explode throughout the country just hours after the president's inauguration.
Bombs explode throughout the country just hours after the president's inauguration.
Islamic gunmen bomb a police station.
Gunmen kill a  traditional chief who also works as a prison warden.
Gunmen kill a former militant leader and his driver.
Gunmen copying Boko Haram kill 6 in Kankara.
Pirates ambush and shoot dead two patrolmen.
Men riding motorcycles throw bombs into outdoor beer gardens.
A bomb explodes at a beer garden, and militants engage in door-to-door killings.
Two police are shot dead and a military patrol is bombed.
Gunmen raid a police station and steal arms.
Attackers destroy a police station and rob a bank.
A bomb explodes outside a church.
Suspected Boko Haram militants detonate a car bomb, wounding seven civilians.
Muslim youths clash with Christians over allegations that a Muslim carpenter was lured to his death and buried in a poultry farm by a Christian gang.
A bomb explodes near the house of an important traditional ruler, killing 8.
Unknown gunmen bomb a security checkpoint from motorcycles.
Attackers invade a Muslim community and steal its cattle.
A riot erupts in which youths protest the arrest of suspected members of Boko Haram.  Police kill one person and wound several others.
Sectarian riots erupt after 10 Christians are stabbed to death.
A suspected Boko Haram militant attempts to drive a car bomb into police headquarters.  He is shot dead.
Gunmen attack a police station, killing 4 officers and 2 civilians.
Gunmen rob a bank in Gamawa.
Suspected Boko Haram militants shoot dead 3 police and a civilian.
Gunmen attack Christian villages.
Gunmen attack Christian villages.
Unknown bombers thrown a bomb onto the property of an ex-police minister in Bauchi; unknown attackers kill a district chairman in Kano.
Unknown bombers thrown a bomb onto the property of an ex-police minister in Bauchi; unknown attackers kill a district chairman in Kano.
Sectarian riots occur after Muslims begin praying in a predominantly Christian neighborhood.
Attackers assault two villages in an escalating dispute involving Muslim Fulani herdsmen.
Attackers assault two villages in an escalating dispute involving Muslim Fulani herdsmen.
Attackers assassinate a Muslim cleric.
Christians are attacked in an escalating spiral of hostilities suspected to be carried out by Muslim Fulani herdsmen in adjoining villages.
Villages are attacked in an escalating spiral of hostilities suspected to be carried out by Muslim Fulani herdsmen in adjoining villages.
Drunk police officers open fire on a funeral service.
Gunmen attack a police station and rob a bank.
Unknown attackers open fire on a bar.
Attackers invade a Christian village.
Suspected members of Boko Haram assassinate a lawyer and an employee of the emergency management agency.
Gunmen attack a supply vessel.
Suspected members of Boko Haram throw a bomb at soldiers, killing two bystanders at a wedding.
A gang of robbers attacks a village in a reprisal for extra-judicial and vigilante killings by villagers.  Arrests are made.
Unknown assailants shoot dead two people.  The motive is specifically mentioned as unknown.
Labor union protesters attack a telephone exchange, alleging that the company unfairly dismissed 3000 employees.  More than 5 million telephone subscribers are cut off due to the attack.
Unknown bombers explode a bomb outside a hospital.
A union of cell phone retailers stages a rare public protest against the military, accusing it of killing their leader.
Businessmen protest the death of a colleague they say was shot by a soldier.
Suspected Boko Haram militants assassinate a community leader and a police officer.
A series of explosions targets police barracks.
Soldiers raid a home, resulting in two deaths.
Pirates attack a ship.
Suspected Boko Haram militants attack police.
Gunmen bomb a police station and rob two banks.
A suspected militant opens fire, killing a soldier.
Unknown attackers invade a church in Tabak, killing two.  Retaliatory riots erupt in Zonkwa.
Unknown attackers invade a church in Tabak, killing two.  Retaliatory riots erupt in Zonkwa.
Pirates seize an oil tanker.
Religious tensions lead to rioting.
Suspected militants bomb a police station.
Women protest against the insecurity that led to the deaths of a traditional ruler and his wife.
Workers of the state power company protest the deployment of armed troops to their offices in the wake of a call by the union to strike.
Gunmen blow up a police station and attack a bank.
Fulani herdsmen set up an illegal roadblock and kill two people.
Ethno-sectarian riots.
Unknown attackers burn down churches.
Suspected militants fire on a wedding.
Unknown attackers bomb a police station and rob a bank.
Unknown bombers explode a bomb at a market.
An armed militia marches in protest of Boko Haram, firing shotguns and rifles into the air.
Bombs explode at locations where people gather to view a soccer match.
Gunmen open fire on a boarding school run by military officers.
Suspected Boko Haram militants shoot dead 5 civilians in a drive-by shooting.
Protesters demonstrate against the state government, which has allowed a private company to build a toll road.  Police use tear gas.
Suspected militants conduct a wave of attacks.
Suspected militants conduct a wave of attacks.
Suspected militants conduct a wave of attacks.
Fulani gunmen kill three Berom Christians.
Assailants bomb a Muslim school in a Christian area.
Gunmen throw bombs into a bar.
An explosions kills 4 outside a Mosque, in an apparent reprisal for the Christmas Day bombings targeting Christians.
Two neighboring communities wage war over a land dispute.
Two neighboring communities wage war over a land dispute.
Citizens demonstrated against government removal of fuel subsidy.
Demonstrations broke out over increased fuel prices due to the elimination of subisidies.
Demonstrations broke out over increased fuel prices due to the elimination of subisidies.
Demonstrators protested over rising fuel prices, smashed window of newspaper van and beat a security guard. Citizens engaged in sleep-in in traffic roundabout, police fired tear gas and beat protesters.
Riots broke out over elimination of fuel subsidy, citizens set fires on expressway, vandalized gas stations, and assaulted a solider. 1 allegedly shot dead by police.
Riots broke out over elimination of fuel subsidy, citizens set fires on expressway, vandalized gas stations, and assaulted a solider. 1 allegedly shot dead by police.
Lawyers demonstrated to protest the rising price of petrol.
Citizens demonstrated against fuel price increase by carrying a mock coffin and chanting anti-government songs.
 shirts as part of loose-knit group of protests. Citizens engaged in violence in some locations, churches, mosques and residents attacked with thousands internally displaced. Flaming roadblocks were erected.
Gunmen attacked Christian village, killing 3.
Pirates hijacked ship with crew of 20 Indians and 1 Ukranian, rescued by naval forces.
Citizens demonstrated outside state TV headquarters to protest its of airing pro-fuel subsidy removel stories and commercials.
Mob from Christian village attacked Muslim village, burning mosques and homes. 2 killed.
2 customers were killed and one police officer wounded in attack outside of beer garden.
2 people killed and others wounded in attack outside of beer garden.
Demonstrators gathered to resume protest and strike against end of government fuel subsidies. Labor unions called off strike on Monday.
Demonstrators gathered to resume protest and strike against end of government fuel subsidies. Labor unions called off strike on Monday.
Citizens demonstrated to protest deployment of soldiers during fuel protests, police fired tear gas in response.
Akogwu was shot and killed while reporting on bombings in Kano.
Unknown bombers detonated dynamite that targeted an important bridge, little damage was caused. Another explosion aslo occurred in city.
11 people were killed in assualts that involved attacks on churches.
Youths overran police station day after it was attacked by Boko Haram, promised to kill any officer that returned.
A bomb blast hit a motor park in a largely Christian neighborhood in Kano.
AQIM kidnapped German engineer Raupach to demand release of German woman convicted of supporting terrorist network.
Gunmen killed 15 traders on their way to market then burned bodies of victims. Police suspect robbery but no goods were missing.
Gunmen shot and killed a police officer returning from work.
Gunmen on bicycle shot and killed a guard outside of a church.
Gunmen riding on motorcycles and opened fire on citizens, killing 2.
5 improvised explosive devices were exploded alongside roads, no casualties occurred.
Gunmen shot and killed policeman in front of his house, then detonated explosives to facilitate their escape.
Tanker was hijacked, Nigerian vessels intercepted ship and rescued crew.
Muhammadu was shot and killed after leaving a mosque by two men riding on motorcycles.
Police officer accidentally shot and killed bus driver in Onitsha, angry citizens then rioted in Onitsha and Asaba. Hausa Muslims were attacked and shops were looted.
Police officer accidentally shot and killed bus driver in Onitsha, angry citizens then rioted in Onitsha and Asaba. Hausa Muslims were attacked and shops were looted.
Vessel was attacked by pirates but escaped.
Two brothers, Christian Igbos, shot and killed by gunmen dressed in white robes.
Gunmen attacked government building, security officers foiled the attack.
Pirates attacked cargo ship and stole a safe, shot and killed cook while chief engineer died trying to escape.
Bomb exploded near bridge in residential area near military checkpoint, second bomb killed bomb disposal officer checking contents of plastic bag on the site.
Police officer shot and killed by gunmen.
Gunmen refused to stop at a police checkpoint and opened fire, killing 2 police officers.
Bomb planted by abandoned car outside of a church was exploded, 5 wounded.
Gunmen attacked and burnt down two schools and a store over 2 days.
Gunmen riding on motorcycles shot at group of police patrolling on foot on checkpoint near home of Nigeria's police chief.
Gunmen on motorcycles opened fire on police at checkpoint, killing 3.
Gunmen attacked 2 villages in rural Kaduna, killing 2.
Gunmen shot and killed head of local vigilante group.
Police stopped an attack on a church, arrested 7 Christians involved in dispute with church.
Armed pirates opened fire on ship, kidnapped captain, chief engineer and crew member, also robbed crew.
Gunmen attacked a police station, civilian killed in crossfire when police shot back.
Assailants attacked two schools, setting one ablaze and destroying the other.
Pirates opened fire on oil tanker, ship escaped after crew enforced anti-piracy measures.
Gunmen attacked soldiers in Niger Delta creeks, 4 presumed dead.
Assailants set fire to a primary school.
Hausa Fulani herdsmen attacked Tiv villages, burning homes and killing 16. Groups have previously fought over land.
Soldiers shot and killed motorcyclist at a checkpoint.
Demonstrators lit bonfires and marched through city in protest over shooting death of motorcyclist by soldiers.
Gunmen shot and killed 2 police officers guarding house of top police official.
Airline suspended flight to South Africa in protest over S.A. authorities refusing Nigerians entry over yellow fever vaccination cards.
Hostages were killed before UK/Nigerian team could rescue them.
Gunmen attacked 3 banks and a police station, killing 3 police.
Three gunmen on a motorcycle shot and killed Ali.
Youths angry over church bombing burned down homes in retaliation.
Suicide bomber attacked church during mass, killing at least 10.
Gunmen shot and killed 3 Christians in area where Christian-Muslims tensions were high after church attack.
6 gunmen on motorcycles shot at police station, 1 policeman killed.
Gunmen raided Christian village, killing 10 including a pastor.
Gunmen on motorcycles attacked a local gathering spot, killing 2.
Gunmen shot and killed police inspector while shopping in market.
Rioters burnt down police station to protest the arrest of their friends.
Spanish doctor was taken hostage and was feared to be kidnapped.
Judge ordered arrest of journalists covering court hearing, leading police to beat some of the reporters.
A suicide car bomber detonated explosives on busy road, killing 41. Nearby churches were damaged, possibly targets of bomb.
2 men were killed near community centre showing soccer matches days after Boko Haram warned people to stay away from viewing centres.
Gunmen attacked pipeline in oil-rich southern delta.
Three people were injured when bomb made out of a drink can exploded at a bar in Christian neighborhood.
Doctors went on strike to demand unpaid salaries/allowances, strike ended when doctors fired by government.
Policeman was wounded by gunmen who opened fire on him outside of a petrol station.
3 people were killed when unidentified gunmen ambushed their car.
Students peacefully demonstrated over lack of water and electricity on campus.
Assailants killed five people in an attack on the village.
Muslim herdsmen razed Christian farming villages, killing 6 on May 1. 12 killed over the course of week during attacks.
Gunmen killed 5 people in a bar, including a police officer, politician, and state government official.
Bomb was exploded at a bar where locals gather to watch soccer, 1 killed.
Attackers raided 2 police stations and a bank with gunfire and bombings, bank was robbed.
Gunmen killed two police officers.
Gunfire and explosions were heard in Gombe, university building bombed.
2 players and an assistant coach for Ocean Boys injured in attack before game.
Gunmen attacked church services in coordinated attacks at university campus and church, killing 23.
Gunmen attacked church services in coordinated attacks at university campus and church, killing 23.
Suicide bomber drove into convoy with police official, killing 10 including 2 civilians and causing damage at roadside market. Sule not injured.
Gunmen attacked residence of 3 traders, shot and killed them.
Fulani herdsmen attacked Christian Berom in a village, killing 2.
Robbers opened fire at market, killing 3. Angry crowd beat one of the gunmen and burnt him alive.
Gunmen angered by crowd burning one of their crew alive attacked a cattle market, killing 34.
Gunmen disguised in military uniforms shot and killed 5 residents.
Residents demonstrated at office of governor over prolonged doctors' strike, which they claimed was costing lives.
Pirates hijacked ship and held crew hostage before releasing them and ship later in the day.
Gunmen attacked construction workers, killing a Lebanese and a Nigerian worker. Also abducted another Lebanese national.
Home of Odion was invaded by gunmen hours after car crash involving car in which governor's staff normally rides.
Muslim gunmen set fire to home and shot and macheted those who ran outside to escape.
Multiple explosions and gunshots were heard near a church and another area in Maiduguri.
Motorcyclist threw bomb near a church, bank, and a brothel causing no injuries.
Gunmen robbed banks and bombed police stations, 2 police officers killed.
Fulani herdsmen razed 5 remote villages of ethnic Pere people, likely reprisal for earlier killing. 12 killed, including police officer.
Citizens playing cards were shot and killed by 3 gunmen on a motorcycle.
Oyerinde was murdered by unknown assailant.
Fulani attackers burned dozens of houses in attacks, killed 10 Christian Tiv.
Gunmen attacked building near police post, police engaged them in shootout. 2 killed, including police inspector.
2 people were killed when gunmen opened fire at timber market.
Cleric was wounded by unknown gunmen.
Engineers for Air Nigeria went on strike.
Gunmen on motorcycles shot and killed three people resting under a tree just before the sunset prayer.
Gunmen forced their way into homes of cleric and former prison guard next door, shot and killed both.
Gunmen opened fire on worshippers outside home of controversial cleric critical of Boko Haram.
Shop owners refused to open shops in protest of killing of bartender the previous night.
Italian national working for a construction company was kidnapped.
Gunmen shot and killed 4 shop owners outside their shops, Igobs in city had refused to open shops over killing of bartender.
Students demonstrated against presidential decision change name of University of Lagos, blocked main bridge in city using comandeered buses. University shut down campus for 2 weeks.
Soldiers raided AQIM hideout, 5 terrorists killed in firefight. Kidnapped German engineer Edgar Fritz Raupach stabbed to death by captors during event.
Students demonstrated against presidential decision to rename university, altercation broke out with police who fired tear gas in response.
Pirates attacked tanker but were unable to hijack ship after crew hid in a safe room.
Soldiers and police used pieces of scrap lumber to strike citizens who wouldn't step away from site of plane crash.
Suicide bomber was killed when bomb went off prematurely.
Suicide bomber blew up car outside police HQ, killing one police officer, 4 civilians and himself.
Gunmen on a bike shot police constable outside his house, drug vendor also killed in shooting.
Gunmen on motorcycle shot and killed Isa and his friend.
Gunmen on motorcycle shot and killed Muhammad.
Armed robbers killed 27 while attacking villages preparing for a local market day, believed to be revenge for killings of group by villagers tired of robberies.
Armed robbers killed 27 while attacking villages preparing for a local market day, believed to be revenge for killings of group by villagers tired of robberies.
Air Nigeria workers went on strike over company refusal to pay salaries and address poor working conditions.
Mobs barricaded roads and attacked motorists who looked Muslim in response to suicide bombings of Christian churches, 10 killed. Soldiers shot and killed 3 members of mob attempting to destroy mosque in Kaduna.
Mobs barricaded roads and attacked motorists who looked Muslim in response to suicide bombings of Christian churches, 10 killed. Soldiers shot and killed 3 members of mob attempting to destroy mosque in Kaduna.
Mobs barricaded roads and attacked motorists who looked Muslim in response to suicide bombings of Christian churches, 10 killed. Soldiers shot and killed 3 members of mob attempting to destroy mosque in Kaduna.
Angry mobs burned tires as government lifted curfew following church bombings, rioters burned Christian shops and attacked Christians when relatives were unable to claim remains of deceased in Muslim area.
Man lost arms and legs after bomb he was carrying went off, target unclear.
Bomb went off near a popular nightclub, no one was injured.
Explosive device was set off at beer garden, many wounded.
Gunmen robbed banks and attacked police station and offices, 3 policeman and 2 civilians were killed.
Baren and family were shot and killed by Muslim Fulani herdsmen.
Police station was attacked by gunmen who threw explosives and opened fire.
Bomb was detonated at popular shopping mall, no injuries reported.
Christian youths set up barricades on major highways in search of Muslim motorists to vent anger over killing of Christian lawmakers.
Fulani herdsmen stormed a village and torched dozens of houses, displacing 200 people.
Bomb was exploded near a church, no casualties reported.
Rocket-propelled grenade fired at school missed and hit nearby house, killing 10-yr old boy.
4 gunmen on motorcycles shot and killed 3 people, including police constable, at abandoned factory.
Gunmen fired at crowds in drive-by at major junction where people buy cigarettes and play cards, 2 killed and policeman injured.
Gunmen shot and killed 2 traders in largest market in city.
Police officer alledgedly kills local chief during forcible eviction of floating slums.
Bomb hidden inside wheelbarrow exploded near beer garden, killing young boy and wounding others.
Pirates attacked vessel transporting workers, one worker drowned trying to escape.  Vessel stolen by pirates.
Gunmen shot and killed 3 policemen at a highway checkpoint.
Gunmen on motorcycle killed a policeman after his shift guarding local politician.
Gunmen on motorcycle shot and killed 2 Christian Igbo people outside of their house.
Gunmen on motorcycle opened fire on car of air force officer, killing driver and aide.
Gunmen opened fire near mosque during prayers, police killed 3 gunmen and another was killed when his own explosive device detonated.
Suicide bomber was thwarted in attempt to attack Muslim leader before detonating his explosive.
Gunmen attacked 2 ships off coast, killing 2 navy sailors protecting them and kidnapping 4 foreign workers who were freed Aug. 23.
Gunmen entered church just before bible study and opened fire, killing 19 including the pastor.
3 gunmen on motorcycles shot and killed soldiers patrolling outside government building. 2 soldiers and 2 attackers killed.
3 gunmen on motorcycle opened fire on military vehicle, killing 2 soldiers.
Gunmen in a car shot 2 policemen on patrol.
Residents reported that police raided homes and beat unarmed civilians in search of perpetrators of church massacre.
Gunmen fired shots at church during mass, killing policeman on guard and wounding another.
2 men on motorcycle and a passerby were killed when their improvised explosive device detonated on road leading to mosque.
Bomber riding a motorized tricycle killed himself and a civilian in attack targeting a military vehicle.
Strike occurred over government non-payment of fuel subsidies that led to shortages, petrol importers accused of being behind strike.
Bomb exploded between police station and residential building, civilian injured.
Gunmen on motorcycles fired on troops at checkpoint, soldier injured.
Gunmen blew up part of primary school, then attacked Catholic church and police station before being fought off by police.
Fulani herdsmen attacked a mainly Christian village, killing 2 people.
Lactop Marine Force abducted 28 oil workers, 27 of whom were later freed by joint army-navy operation.
Pirates hijacked oil tanker, 23 Indian sailors held hostage freed when Nigerian navy retook ship.
Gunmen shot and killed 3 oil company employees doing repair on oil pipeline.
Demonstrators protested U.S.-produced film critical of Prophet Muhammad, chanted against U.S. and Israel. Soldiers fired into the air to disperse crowds in Jos.
Demonstrators protested U.S.-produced film critical of Prophet Muhammad, chanted against U.S. and Israel. Soldiers fired into the air to disperse crowds in Jos.
Demonstrators protested U.S.-produced film critical of Prophet Muhammad, chanted against U.S. and Israel. Soldiers fired into the air to disperse crowds in Jos.
Gunmen stormed home of Gana, shot and killed him.
The Islamic Movement of Nigeria and Nigerian citizens protested against the U.S., France, and Israel
Unions unhappy with unpaid salaries raided airline's offices at Lagos airport, causing airline to cancel its flights.
Demonstrators matched toward palace of Emir of Kano to protest film critical of the Muslim Prophet Muhammad, images of Barack Obama burnt and US & Israeli flags defaced.
Bomber attacked church conducting mass, killing a woman, 8-year old boy and the bomber.
Demonstrators protested against anti-Islam film, burned French, British, Israeli and US flags.
Exchange of gunfire occurred between gunmen and security forces.
Attackers killed 3 University of Maiduguri students.
Gunmen detonated bomb near Islamic boarding school run by critic of Boko Haram, later engaged in gunfight with security forces that led to deaths of 2 attackers.
Bomb was detonated at mobile phone tower.
Bomb targeting a military patrol vehicle exploded, killing a soldier.
Attackers shot or stabbed to death 40 people, including -  students of Federal Polytechnic, 3 of another college, ex-soldier, security guard, an eldery man, and another individual. Gunmen called out victims by name before killing them.
Explosion was set off at beer garden in Jalingo, killing 2.
Bomb was detonated at beer garden, injuring 8 people.
Gunmen shot and injured Barde outside a mosque.
Gunmen fired indiscriminately on a mostly Muslim village, 2 killed.
Soldiers angry about the killing of an officer initially used whips and butts of guns to beat people then later shot and killed 30 civilians, set fire to about 50 homes and businesses.
Gunmen killed 14 people belonging to Christian ethnic group, including mother and 3 children.
Gunmen opened fire on a car, killing 2 Christians.
Villagers attacked and killed Muslim man in retaliation for Christians killed earlier in Barkin Ladi.
Gunmen shot and killed two officers of federal traffic agency who were checking vehicles.
Gunmen disguised as police attacked village, killing 21 including worshippers leaving a mosque. Raid carried out by armed robbers in running dispute with local vigilante group.
Bomb was detonated that targeted citizens heading to a nearby church in neighborhood where prior bombing led to military retaliation against citizens.
Explosive device went off on a main road, military patrol was target. Soldiers began firing indiscriminately after explosion.
Married couple and their child were shot and killed by gunmen as they left Church of Christ in Nigeria.
Muslim herdsmen attacked Christian Tiv village over a land dispute that had caused violence in past, houses were burnt and 30 killed.
Turkish construction worker was kidnapped in attempt to gain ransom money.
Soldiers shot and killed motorist as he struggled to park on roadside to give way to passing military vehicle.
Gunmen attacked ship, kidnapped 6 Russians and an Estonian before escaping. Hostages released Oct. 31.
Bomb was detonated which targeted a military vehicle, soldiers responded by opening fire outside a market. 3 people injured.
Bomb targeting soldiers detonated, killing police officer. Military responded by raiding homes, 4 set ablaze as gunfire rang out.
Chinese worker was shot and killed by gunmen on road undergoing reconstruction.
Petrol bombs were detonated, leading to fire that engulfed 11 roadside shops. 1 civilian also shot and killed.
Magazi was shot and killed by gunmen.
Bomb was detonated targeting military vehicle, setting it on fire.
Suicide bomber drove an SUV filled with explosives into church, killing 8 (including himself) and wounding 100.
Youths angry over suicide bombing of Catholic church armed with machetes beat to death 2 Muslims passing by, taxi driver burnt alive.
Bandits stormed village, firing indiscriminately before raiding homes for valuables. 20 killed.
Operation conducted by military involved youths being rounded up in searches, with males in teens and twenties separated from older men. Youths were later shot dead in a field with 40 killed.
Three gunmen on a motorcycle shot and killed 3 people outside of a home, one of the victims was engaged to woman who escaped attack in another part of city.
Kawonise and police officer traveling with him were shot by gunmen while traveling on highway, Kawonise had received recent threats over the internet.
Two explosions targeting military patrol missed but killed 2 civilians. Shootout ensued, military arrested several attackers.
Remote controlled explosive device targeting military patrol was detonated, no casualites reported.
Gunmen attacked a police station, burnt 3 churches and a primary school. 3 police officers killed.
Gunmen raided a police station with explosives and gunfire. Shootout ensued, 1 policeman killed.
Gunmen raided home of Christian Igbos, shot and killed 5 people.
 by military, Ibrahim and some of his cohort were killed. Ibrahim was responsible for killing of former General Mamman Shuwa.
Gunmen on motorcycles shot and killed Garko as he sat with friends. 2 others injured in attack.
Christian vigilante group set up roadblocks to prevent Muslims from nearing church during service, killed Muslim who insisted on going through checkpoint.
Trader was accused of insulting Prophet Muhammad, Christian shops and church were set on fire in retaliation. 4 killed in violence.
Twin suicide bombers attacked church inside key military base/college. One bomber used bus loaded with explosives. 11 killed.
Two gunmen on motorcycles shot and killed Christian couple and child as they were on their way to church.
Gunmen in army uniforms opened fire from a moving van on road leading to Plateau state airport, killing 10 people in predominantly Christian town. AFP reports event happened at a pub.
Gunmen attacked police station that holds members of Islamic sect, freeing 30 prisoners and killing 2 police officers.
Citizens barricaded road to protest killing of 10 people by gunmen dressed as soldiers.
Oil workers picketed and blocked the offices of Shell and Chevron in several cities to protest plans to cut jobs and to demand temporary employees be given permanent jobs.
Oil workers picketed and blocked the offices of Shell and Chevron in several cities to protest plans to cut jobs and to demand temporary employees be given permanent jobs.
Oil workers picketed and blocked the offices of Shell and Chevron in several cities to protest plans to cut jobs and to demand temporary employees be given permanent jobs.
Oil workers picketed and blocked the offices of Shell and Chevron in several cities to protest plans to cut jobs and to demand temporary employees be given permanent jobs.
Two men hurled explosives at bus filled with passengers, wouding 2.
Explosion occurred outside of police station, police fire off shots in response. 1 civilian injured.
Gunmen shot and killed 2 policemen directing traffic near site of bus attack.
Okonjo was abducted from her home after her finance minister son had received recent threats. Freed on Dec. 14. Son claimed abduction was motivated by government stopping fuel subsidies.
Kademi was shot and killed by gunmen on a motorcycle outside a guesthouse he owned.
Gunmen abducted 5 employees of South Korean company at a construction site.
Gunmen attacked tanker off Niger Delta, kidnapped 5 Indian sailors and stole their personal belongings.
Ansaru kidnapped French engineer, killed his neighbor and security guard, and attacked police station. Group cited stance of French government and people on Islam as reason for abduction.
Gunmen attacked moving supply vessel, kidnapped 4 foreign sailors, then fled the scene.
At least 7 people were killed over several days in Christian villages in rural areas.
Conflict between Fulani herdsmen and local farmers over cattle encroaching on land led to 2 deaths and the displacement of 1500 people.
Attackers raided a church during service, shot and killed 15 people.
Gunmen attacked a local police station
Bandits murdered seven in a coordinated attack within the Zamfara region
Bandits murdered seven in a coordinated attack within the Zamfara region
Bandits murdered seven in a coordinated attack within the Zamfara region
Gunmen attacked police in Kano
The Emir of Kano was attacked
An IED killed two soldiers and wounded five in Okene
Gunmen murdered five in Kano
Boko Haram gunmen killed 18 in Damboa
Boko Haram beheaded five after storming their houses
Fulani Herdsmen fought with Christian farmers
Eight villagers were murdered
Boko Haram attacked police station
Unknown gunmen attacked police in Kano
Nigerian military assaulted Boko Haram base
Herders and farmers clashed
Militants kill two in Nigeria's Niger Delta Region
Pirates attacked a ship off the coast of Nigeria and took hostages
Militants killed nine people in attacks on polio clinics in Kano
Militants slit the throat of three North Korean doctors
Bomb blasts kill two soldiers
Gunmen kidnapped seven foreign workers
Pirates attacked a ship off the coast of Bayelsa state. They asked for 1.3 Million for foreign hostages
Boko Haram bombed government officials. Killed two civilians and one attacker died. It is probable that the attacker was a suicide bomber
Gunmen killed five card players a day before the local elections. The timing of the attack is suspect, but there's no evidence to conclude that it is election related
Boko Haram killed six in an attack
Gunmen kill a senior police officer in Kano
Students demonstrated a lack of clean water and basic services
Christians and Muslim youths clashed over use of a soccer field leading to the death of 20
Nigerian military killed a Boko Haram commander and three of his lieutenants
Bombing killed three, including a Nigerian soldier. Though Boko Haram has not taken credit for it, most experts feel that it was for retaliation for the Nigerian Government's new offensive
Gunmen attempted to take hostage multiple foreigners, killing two police guards
Boko Haram launched a failed attack against the Nigerian government, leaving 20 dead
Boko Haram attacked a police station
Nigerian military launched a clearing assault against the Boko Haram
Ansura stated that they killed the hostages
Boko Haram bombed many bus stations
Ataka and Fulani ethnic groups engaged in armed conflict with one another
Attacks in Eastern Nigeria
Attackers launched an assault on a prison freeing 127
Nigerian military raided a suspected hideout for Boko Haram
Fulani herdsmen snuck into a village and murdered 19
MEND militants ambushed Nigerian forces
Fulani herdsmen attacked Ataka ethnic groups
Militants killed four people associated with providing nutrition to children
Boko Haram attacked a police station
Tarok ethnic groups attempted to remove the mostly Muslim Junkun ethnic group through killing and razing houses
Nigerian military and Boko Haram clashed in Baga
Boko Haram attacked Nigerian Government
Pirates took five foreign hostages
Boko Haram attacked Nigerian Government
Sectarian tensions spill over in rioting that kills 39, after Christians marched through a Muslim neighborhood
Gunmen shot at Church goers in the early morning
Rival gang (unidentified by the story) killed 8 former militia members
Boko Haram attacked multiple targets to free prisoners
Ombatse pagan movement ambushed police on their way to arrest them for making citizens take blood oaths
The Military killed dozens of insurgents in an offensive against Boko Haram
Pirates hijacked the MT Matrix Crew off the coast of Nigeria
Boko Haram launched a targeted killing against vigilantes who inform for the police
Boko Haram launched an attack that targeted a secondary school and a check point
Boko Haram murdered school children
Unknown gunmen attacked suspected vigilantes
Fulani herdsmen attacked Tarok farmers for suspected cattle rustling
Nigerian military killed 20 Boko Haram militants in a shoot out in Maiduguri
Local vigilantes burned down the house of a local politician who was critical of the vigilante involvement in the fight against Boko Haram
Boko Haram murdered 42 school children in Mamudo
Boko Haram attacked security officials
Boko Haram attacked civilians. Boko Haram was repelled by the Civilian Joint Task Force who is a civilian militia
Boko Haram bombed an outdoor market in Kano
Boko Haram targeted Teachers in rural Bui Town
Boko Haram assaulted police in Bama which led to a military intervention and street battles
Boko Haram killed worshippers at a Mosque
Boko Haram attacked a police station
Boko Haram, dressed as soldiers, ambushed residents in Dumba whom they killed
Unidentified gunmen attacked a police station killing three
Boko Haram attacked residents of a town near the Cambodian border
Boko Haram ambushed CJTF vigilantes
Nigerian Navy killed Pirates
Boko Haram killed 14 herders
Residents protested the arbitrary arrests of suspects
Boko Haram attacked a market in Gajiram
Nigerian Military assualted a Boko Haram base
the CJTF assualted Boko Haram after hearing that they were planning an attack
Boko Haram attacked a police station
Civilian militias attacked the a police officer in retaliation
CJTF caught and killed members of Boko Haram
Nigerian Military assualted a Boko Haram base
Boko Haram attacked Nigerian Government
Boko Haram stormed Benishiek and slaughtered multiple civilians
Boko Haram murdered a pastor
Boko Haram murdered 40 college students in their dorm
Armed Bandits killed a Niger soldier in Nigeria
Nigerian government bombed Boko Haram
Boko Haram assaulted a mosque, but were fought off by the Nigerian government
Fulani Herdsmen attacked suspected cattle rustlers in a neighboring village.
Boko Haram attacked government positions in the Borno state, but were repelled
Boko Haram attacked government positions in the Borno state, but were repelled
Boko Haram attacked government positions in the Borno state, but were repelled
Boko Haram, dressed as soldiers, attacked motorists in Logumani
Nigerian forces assaulted a Boko Haram camp following an attack on civilians
Pirates capture two Americans off the coast of Brass
Nigerians bombed Boko Haram hideout killing 74
Boko Haram stormed a police station
Boko Haram stormed the town of Bama
Boko Haram ambushed a wedding party convoy killing 30
Unknown gunmen killed a family of four
The Nigerian government staged an attack against suspected Boko Haram
Fulani Herdsmen attack Agatu Christians
The Nigerian government blocked a meeting of SERAP as part of a greater crackdown on civil society organization
Nigerian government engaged Boko Haram Militants
Unknown gunmen shot dead a police officer
Boko Haram assaulted a village
Fulani Herdsmen attacked Christians
Nigerian government bombed Boko Haram
Boko Haram assaulted civilians
Boko Haram assaulted civilians
Nigerian government bombed Boko Haram
Boko Haram assaulted a military base. Fleeing, the military killed fifty islamists
Islamists killed 12 Christians in Borno state
Muslim herdsmen attack a village, killing mainly women, children, and the elderly and taking or killing their livestock.
Muslim gunmen attack worshippers.
Nigerian military stages counter-insurgency mission.
A bomb explodes at a courthouse where a decision is made about the next speaker of the state assembly.
Nigerian military bombs suspected Boko Haram after an attack on a village that kills 8.
Boko Haram attacks a market, killing five.
Boko Haram attacks villages, killing 5.
Boko Haram attacks villages, killing 5.
During a protest, police use rubber bullets.
Suicide bombers attack a military post located in a commercial area at lunchtime.
Boko Haram attacks a village on motorbikes, killing five.
Nigerian military stages near-daily bombing raids on Boko Haram camps.
Boko Haram attacks a police station, sparking clashes with military forces.
Boko Haram attacks a village, killing 7. Three drown in an attempt to flee.
Boko Haram attacks outside Maiduguri, killing 18.
Boko Haram raids a farming villages, murders and takes their food.
Boko Haram murders a teacher in his home and wounds another man.
Boko Haram kills 18 during attacks on farming settlements.
Boko Haram kills 18 during attacks on farming settlements.
Boko Haram kills 18 during attacks on farming settlements.
Thousands of protesters gather calling for the death sentence of men accused of being gay and the next day try to stone 7 of the accused.
Employees protest after four drowned while removing industrial waste.
Unknown gunmen attack Chinese workers, killing 1 and wounding 2 others.
MEND fighters attack a patrol boat.
Boko Haram attacks a village disguised as traders and burn down 300 homes.
Boko Harram attacks a Roman Catholic Church.
Fulani Muslims murder a Christian family, provoking reprisal attacks by Christian youth.
A bus drives over an IED set by Boko Haram.
Boko Haram kills a pastor and attack a Christian village, stealing and killing livestock; youth vigilantes drive them off and soldiers are deployed.
Boko Haram is suspected of murdering a cleric, his wife and child because he supported the military campaign against Boko Haram.
Gunmen attack two villages.
Gunmen attack two villages.
Unknown gunmen attack a predominantly Muslim village.
Boko Haram attacks two villages.
Boko Haram attacks two villages.
Boko Haram ambushes soldiers responding to a distress call. 9 soldiers killed, Boko Haram deaths unknown.
A mob and then police beat 14 young men accused of being gay.
Boko Haram attacks a mainly Christian village, slaughtering indiscriminately. They loot businesses and food stores.
Boko Haram attacks a fishing village and kill residents, some drown attempting to flee the attack.
11 villagers are killed in an attack by Boko Haram.
A soldier and unknown number of civilians are killed in an attack.
Boko Haram attacks a village which erupts into clashes with soldiers.
Unknown gunmen attack a village, killing 13, including 9 children.
Boko Haram attacks a mainly Christian village.
Boko Haram attacks sleeping secondary school students and abduct female students; soldiers didn't arrive for hours.
Boko Haram attacks three villages, killing innocent people and looting and destroying businesses and buildings.
Boko Haram attacks three villages, killing innocent people and looting and destroying businesses and buildings.
Boko Haram attacks three villages, killing innocent people and looting and destroying businesses and buildings.
A Nigerian plane targeting extremists kills a reported 20 civilians; a raid on a camp kills 13 militants.
A Nigerian plane targeting extremists kills a reported 20 civilians; a raid on a camp kills 13 militants.
A crowded market is hit by two consecutive bombs, one hour later village attacked.
A crowded market is hit by two consecutive bombs, one hour later village attacked.
MEND claims they sabotaged an oil pipeline.
Boko Haram raids a village, soldiers flee because they are outnumbered and overpowered. 2 police killed next morning in bomb attack while trying to evacuate victims.
Boko Haram attacks a checkpoint, prompting a police chase where 3 policemen are killed.
Boko Haram burns huts, killing 11 mainly older villagers
Four mostly Christian communities are attacked; mostly women and children are victims.
The military repels an ambush by Boko Haram, killing 20 insurgents.
Women protest violence, particularly against children, created by Boko Haram.
Women protest violence, particularly against children, created by Boko Haram.
Women protest violence, particularly against children, created by Boko Haram.
Suspected Fulani mercenaries attack the governor's convoy, no one is reported injured.
Fulani herdsmen attack four villages on motorbikes; attributed to issues over grazing land.
Fulani herdsmen attack four villages on motorbikes; attributed to issues over grazing land.
Fulani herdsmen attack four villages on motorbikes; attributed to issues over grazing land.
Fulani herdsmen attack four villages on motorbikes; attributed to issues over grazing land.
Fulani herdsmen attack four villages on motorbikes; attributed to issues over grazing land.
Boko Haram attacks a residential area and military compound, freeing a large number of prisoners. 425 bodies were counted at the morgue.
Mainly Christian villages are attacked by suspected Muslim herdsmen.
Mainly Christian villages are attacked by suspected Muslim herdsmen.
Mainly Christian villages are attacked by suspected Muslim herdsmen.
A labor union protests the Interior Minister after a stampede at an event for job seekers leaves 7 dead.
An bomb set by Boko Haram explodes in a busy market.
Muslim herdsmen attack a mainly Christian farming community over grazing rights.
About 50 people riot while trying to gain access to a run-down house where bodies and imprisoned people were found.
Boko Haram targets police with car bombs; 3 civilians killed.
Fulani herdsmen attack mainly Christian farmers.
MEND claims it further sabotaged an oil pipeline.
Prisoners attempt to break out and 21 die in the process.
Boko Haram fighters are partially stopped before blowing up a petrol station. 15 civilians are killed before all bombs can be dismantled.
Suspected Boko Haram insurgents attack a Mosque.
Suspected Fulani herdsmen attack a security meeting.
Boko Haram murders a local monarch and his guard after the emir of the district asks for help against the insurgents.
Boko Haram insurgents target public buildings, outgun police. One civilian, 7 policemen killed.
Boko Haram attacks a viewing centre, killing two football fans.
Boko Haram attacks villages and vandalizes boreholes.
Boko Haram attacks villages and vandalizes boreholes.
Boko Haram bombs a packed bus station.
Boko Haram kills a police officer and soldier and then abducts 276 schoolgirls.
Christian youths and Muslim herdsmen clash over two days.
Christian youths and Muslim herdsmen clash over two days.
Boko Haram attacks a village.
Thugs using machetes, knives, and clubs attack delegates of the main opposition party in Nigeria.
Unknown gunmen set fire to various buildings.
Fulani herdsmen attack a predominantly Christian village.
Nigerian soldiers battle with Boko Haram insurgents disguised as herdsmen, claiming several militants are killed.
A rival tribe attacks a village after a dispute over farmland.
Teachers stage a walk-out and then teachers' unions and students protest over closed schools and poor facilities.
Hundreds march in Abuja and Kano calling on the government to take stronger action to find the abducted schoolgirls.
Hundreds march in Abuja and Kano calling on the government to take stronger action to find the abducted schoolgirls.
A car bomb explodes at a bus station.
Parents of kidnapped girls march in protest against a lack of action to find their girls.
Mothers and women hold a sit-in calling on the government to allow foreign governments to assist in the search for kidnapped schoolgirls
Four villagers are killed; military uses mortar shells to repel militants.
Three Dutch nationals and two Nigerians are abducted.
Boko Haram razes and attacks a village, opening fire on residents and then bombing a strategic bridge as they retreat.
Men and women stage a sit-in outside military headquarters, begging for more efforts to find kidnapped schoolgirls.
Boko Haram kidnaps 11 more girls.
Hundreds protest the government over its poor effort in finding kidnapped girls
Boko Haram attacks a village, kidnaps the wife and children of a retired police officer, and destroys a bridge.
Villagers ambush Boko Haram militants.
protesters call on the government for more action to find the kidnapped girls.
Boko Haram ambushes soldiers; number of militants killed unknown.
Angry troops fire on their commanding officer.
Militants burn two schools and a telecoms mast, no one hurt.
Militants burn two schools and a telecoms mast, no one hurt.
An emir is killed when ambushed by Boko Haram
Militants burn huts and vehicles, killing 40 villagers.
A suicide bomber kills 4 in a predominantly Christian neighborhood.
Boko Haram attacks two villages, stealing food and burning homes.
Boko Haram attacks two villages, stealing food and burning homes.
Two car bombs level buildings and kill civilians.
Boko Haram attacks a village.
Boko Haram kills 34 in two districts.
protesters call on the government for more action to find the kidnapped girls.
Many schools close in protest to the government's weak response to find kidnapped girls.
An explosion kills three football fans as they watch a championship game.
Boko Haram attacks a village.
Boko Haram attacks a village and are repelled by soldiers at a second.
Boko Haram attacks a village and are repelled by soldiers at a second.
Villagers repel an attack by Boko Haram, killing 7.
Nine people are killed in a village attack.
Boko Haram targets police and the military.
protesters are attacked by young men with bottles and stones.
Boko Haram attacks three villages.
Boko Haram attacks three villages.
Boko Haram attacks three villages.
Gunmen attack a wedding party.
Gunmen attack multiple villages. Number of deaths disputed.
Gunmen attack multiple villages. Number of deaths disputed.
Gunmen attack multiple villages. Number of deaths disputed.
An explosion at a football pitch kills many.
Boko Haram shoots at civilians indiscriminately.
Boko Haram fires on a church; residents defend themselves, killing four militants.
Boko Haram attacks villages and claims them as under the group's control. They continue their raids, stealing livestock and food.
Boko Haram attacks villages and claims them as under the group's control. They continue their raids, stealing livestock and food.
Boko Haram attacks villages and claims them as under the group's control. They continue their raids, stealing livestock and food.
Boko Haram attacks villages and claims them as under the group's control. They continue their raids, stealing livestock and food.
Boko Haram attacks villages and claims them as under the group's control. They continue their raids, stealing livestock and food.
Boko Haram poses as itinerant preachers and opens fire on a crowd.
Boko Haram poses as itinerant preachers and opens fire on a crowd.
A vehicle explodes near the governor's house, killing the 2 drivers and 2 soldiers.
Gunmen attack various buildings and soldiers. Deaths unconfirmed.
Boko Haram abducts 20 women and three young men.
The Nigerian military attacks Boko Haram before they are able to conduct attacks on villages in Borno and Adamawa state.
Youths protest and set fire to a road when the new Emir of Kano (favored by the opposition party) is named; protests erupt to clashes with Emir supporters the following day.
Gunmen attack villages, 3 security personnel killed.
Gunmen attack villages, 3 security personnel killed.
Gunmen attack villages, 3 security personnel killed.
A party supporter is killed in violence after an APC rally. Dozens more injured
Boko Haram attacks a village and market.
Boko Haram storms a mosque, sets fire to a police station and telecom mast, and seizes the local chief.
A suicide bomber targets a World Cup viewing center.
A village is attacked in sectarian violence; women and children fleeing in a boat drown when the skipper is killed.
A vigilante group kills 8 Boko Haram fighters.
Boko Haram attacks and loots five villages.
Boko Haram attacks and loots five villages.
Boko Haram attacks and loots five villages.
Boko Haram attacks and loots five villages.
Boko Haram attacks and loots five villages.
Boko Haram attacks a village and abducts 60 women and girls and 31 boys.
Boko Haram attacks villages in revenge for an attack on their group by vigilantes.
Boko Haram attacks villages in revenge for an attack on their group by vigilantes.
A Boko Haram suicide bomber kills three soldiers at a checkpoint.
Boko Haram attacks a public health college.
Violence likely related to sectarian issues leaves 38 dead.
Violence likely related to sectarian issues leaves 38 dead.
Boko Haram attacks a military checkpoint, killing 51 soldiers and 5 civilians; they also take soldiers hostage.
A bomb explodes at a crowded shopping center.
A car bomb explodes in the financial district of Nigeria's biggest city.
Boko Haram bombs a brothel.
Boko Haram attacks churches.
Boko Haram attacks churches.
Boko Haram attacks churches.
Boko Haram attacks churches.
A truck loaded with an IED explodes in the middle of rush hour traffic.
Doctors are on strike over pay and working conditions.
The military carries out air strikes against Boko Haram, claiming to inflict heavy casualties.
Boko Haram attacks a police station and are repelled by the military. 53 militants and 6 soldiers are killed.
A suicide bomber rams his vehicle into a checkpoint.
Bring Back Our Girls activists are asked to turn back when they march on the presidential palace.
Boko Haram attacks a village. 5 militants are killed.
Boko Haram destroys a bridge, making it harder to access their location in the Sambisa Forest where the 200+ kidnapped girls are considered to be held.
Boko Haram attacks a Christian farming village; Nigerian jets kill civilians, mistaking them for insurgents.
Boko Haram attacks a Christian farming village; Nigerian jets kill civilians, mistaking them for insurgents.
Boko Haram kidnaps a German national.
Boko Haram attacks a village it has blocked military access to and then raises its flags to signal its authority.
Boko Haram bombs attempt to kill two prominent figures.
Boko Haram attacks a village and kills a local traditional leader.
A bomb explodes at a bus station.
Boko Haram gunmen raid two villages, attacking government buildings. They kidnap one policeman in Sigal.
Boko Haram gunmen raid two villages, attacking government buildings. They kidnap one policeman in Sigal.
Boko Haram, including a female suicide bomber, attack two locations in the city.
Two female suicide bombers attack in Kano.
Suicide bombers attack two mosques
Boko Haram blows up a bridge, killing 8 civilians.
A suicide bomber kills 6 on a college campus.
Villagers flee when Boko Haram attacks their village.
Judicial staff go on strike
Boko Haram attacks a village and takes control from the local Emir. Dozens to more than a hundred likely killed.
Boko Haram is repelled in an attack on a police training camp.
Gwoza residents gather to protest a deadly attack by Boko Haram.
Boko Haram storms fishing villages; they kill 28 and kidnap roughly 100 young men and women. Chadian soldiers kill militants and free most hostages.
Boko Haram targets villagers who earlier fled the militants' attacks. Soldiers kill five militants.
Boko Haram targets villagers who earlier fled the militants' attacks. Soldiers kill five militants.
Boko Haram attacks a police academy; 35 missing.
Boko Haram seizes control of a town; unknown killed, but two men killed for smoking. They rob people as they flee.
Boko Haram seizes Madagali and surrounding villages, forcing out soldiers.
Boko Haram burns down a church.
Six people are killed.
Boko Haram moves through villages, taking over control from the military. Three are killed outside a church, and in the days afterwards scores are killed.
Boko Haram moves through villages, taking over control from the military. Three are killed outside a church, and in the days afterwards scores are killed.
The NRA and APFON strike due to a lack of order and controversy in the country's top flight league.
The Cameroonian military shells a Boko Haram camp, killing an unknown number of militants.
The military attempts to repel Boko Haram in an attempt to take over Bama.
Boko Haram reportedly takes over Banki.
Boko Haram reportedly takes over Banki.
Boko Haram advances through villages and clashes with the military in a series of attacks. In the towns they seize, they declare an Islamic Caliphate
Boko Haram advances through villages and clashes with the military in a series of attacks. In the towns they seize, they declare an Islamic Caliphate
Boko Haram advances through villages and clashes with the military in a series of attacks. In the towns they seize, they declare an Islamic Caliphate
Boko Haram advances through villages and clashes with the military in a series of attacks. In the towns they seize, they declare an Islamic Caliphate
Boko Haram advances through villages and clashes with the military in a series of attacks. In the towns they seize, they declare an Islamic Caliphate
Boko Haram advances through villages and clashes with the military in a series of attacks. In the towns they seize, they declare an Islamic Caliphate
Boko Haram advances through villages and clashes with the military in a series of attacks. In the towns they seize, they declare an Islamic Caliphate
Boko Haram advances through villages and clashes with the military in a series of attacks. In the towns they seize, they declare an Islamic Caliphate
Boko Haram advances through villages and clashes with the military in a series of attacks. In the towns they seize, they declare an Islamic Caliphate
Boko Haram attacks a market, killing people and looting grain and vehicles, outside Maduguri.
Boko Haram ambushes a military convoy.
The military repels an attack by hundreds of Boko Haram fighters.
A college is attacked by gunmen and two suicide bombers.
Boko Haram ambush a grain truck, looting it and then set it ablaze.
Boko Haram claims to behead a Nigerian pilot shot down by the group; some question the claim.
Boko Haram attacks a market, killing customers and looting cash and food
15 Boko Haram members are allegedly killed.
Boko Haram beheads 7 people.
protesters march through the capitol, marking 6 months since school girls were kidnapped.
Boko Haram reportedly attacks a town after a cease fire agreement with the government; they seize control. People drown trying to escape the violence.
Gunmen kill 8 on a road near Shaffa village and attack again the next day, killing 4 vigilantes and 3 militants.
Boko Haram attacks villages and abducts 40 and 20 women from Wagga and Gwarta, respectively.
Boko Haram attacks villages and abducts 40 and 20 women from Wagga and Gwarta, respectively.
Boko Haram attacks and the military responds, killing 35 militants.
The sister of Nigeria's petroleum minister is abducted, likely for ransom.
Boko Haram bombs a bus station.
Boko Haram kills 17 in a village attack.
One man is killed and another abducted, likely for ransom.
A multinational force engage in fighting to regain control of the town.
Gunmen kill four police and kidnap 6 employees of a giant oil company.
Boko Haram abducts 30 boys and girls.
Boko Haram attacks a village.
Boko Haram kidnaps dozens.
Boko Haram kidnaps dozens.
Soldiers fight back when Boko Haram attempts to take over multiple towns.
Soldiers fight back when Boko Haram attempts to take over multiple towns.
Boko Haram kills 8 in a triple bombing at a bus station.
Vigilantes claim they beheaded Boko Haram militants and displayed the heads in Biu.
Gunmen break into a prison, allowing 132 inmates to escape.
A suicide bomber attacks a religious ceremony; an angry crowd beats two suspects.
Boko Haram attacks two towns, looting a factory of explosives and trucks.
Boko Haram attacks two towns, looting a factory of explosives and trucks.
Boko Haram attacks a village, clashing with the multinational task force. Unknown number of militants killed.
The morgue receives 16 bodies after they are arrested by the military.
A man leaves a bomb at a bank.
A suicide bomber kills 47 students at an all-boys school
A female suicide bomber injures 4 at a teaching college.
Vigilantes force Boko Haram out of Maiha and they proceed to attack two more villages.
Vigilantes force Boko Haram out of Maiha and they proceed to attack two more villages.
Vigilantes force Boko Haram out of Maiha and they proceed to attack two more villages.
Vigilantes force Boko Haram out of Maiha and they proceed to attack two more villages.
Boko Haram invades Chibok; accounts say vigilantes recaptured it over the weekend.
A suicide bomber kills 3 women and 3 policemen.
A female suicide bomber attacks a shopping complex.
A female suicide bomber attacks a market, killing 13; a man accompanying the female is killed by an angry mob directly after the bombing.
A mob attacks a suicide bomber who attempts to board a bus.
Boko Haram attacks a village, killing and looting food and animals.
Police fire teargas to prevent opposition lawmakers from entering a building for a vote on the extension of a state of emergency in the northeast of the country.
Boko Haram attacks fish vendors, killing them by knife or drowning them to avoid being caught by the multinational task force.
Security agents ransack and vandalize the office of the main opposition party, reportedly to investigate alleged voter card fraud.
Boko Haram attacks a market disguised as traders; they battle with soldiers.
Boko Haram attacks two villages.
Boko Haram attacks two villages.
Two female suicide bombers attack a crowded market.
A roadside bomb kills 5 soldiers.
Boko Haram suicide bombers and gunmen attack worshippers at the mosque of the Emir of Kano; a mob kills three attackers.
2 female suicide bombers attack a market.
Boko Haram launch an assault on police.
Gunmen bomb a prison, freeing more than 300 inmates.
Boko Haram invades a village and attacks a factory, likely looking for supplies.
Boko Haram invades a village and attacks a factory, likely looking for supplies.
Boko Haram bombs a prison, freeing 200 inmates.
Two female suicide bombers attack a market.
Boko Haram kills 11 in a raid.
Two bombs explode at a market.
The military defeats Boko Haram, regaining control of Mubi.
Boko Haram attacks a village, murdering 32 and kidnapping 185.
Boko Haram executes elderly people too weak to flee violence over the course of a week.
The two leading oil unions strike calling for the end of corruption and improve labor standards.
The military repels a Boko Haram attack.
Boko Haram attacks government buildings in a town.
Boko Haram attacks government buildings in a town.
A video released to journalists shows Boko Haram murdering many men in a school.
Boko Haram attacks a village and prison, allowing inmates to escape.
Two explosions kill 20 at a bus station and 7 at a market.
Two explosions kill 20 at a bus station and 7 at a market.
A suicide bomber rams a military checkpoint, but his bombs do not detonate and soldiers kill him.
Boko Haram attacks a village.
A female suicide bomber is killed when she tries to enter military barracks.
A suicide bomber attacked the Evangelist Church of West Africa in Gombe, injuring several people.
Boko Haram gunmen kidnapped 40 men and boys from Malari village in Borno state.
Hunderds of Boko Haram fighters seized the Multinational Joint Task Force base at Baga, killing "scores of soldiers", burned hundreds of homes and looted several businesses in Baga.
Civilian vigilantes and local hunters raided a Boko Haram enclave in Gujba, killing several militants.
Boko Haram killed 25 people and abducted 218 women and children in Kadarko, burning the entire village.
16 villages were destroyed by Boko Haram in Northeast Nigeria.
Boko Haram fighters stormed Damaturu when they were intercepted by the troops
A car exploded at a police station in Potiskum, killing a police officer and a driver, who was stopped at a checkpoint.
A female suicide bomber killed 19 people at a market in Maiduguri.
Two female suicide bombers killed at least 4 people in an attack on a market in Potiskum.
Nigerian troops repelled a Boko Haram attack on Biu. 
A suicide bomber killed 5 people at a market in Gombe.
A suicide bomber killed 4 people at a bus station in potiskum.
Angry youth stoned president Goodluck Jonathan's convoy, protesting government's failure to fight Boko Haram insurgents.
Angry youth stoned president Goodluck Jonathan's convoy, protesting government's failure to fight Boko Haram insurgents.
Two groups of unemployed youth clashed in Lagos, killing 2 people and vandalizing vehicles.
Boko Haram attacked 7 villages in Adamawa state, including the town of Michika, burning and looting homes.
Boko Haram attacked 7 villages in Adamawa state, including the town of Michika, burning and looting homes.
Boko Haram killed 15 villagers in Kambari.
Unknown gunmen bombed a site of a planned opposition rally by the All Progressives Congress party in Port Harcourt.
Boko Haram attacked and seized the town of Monguno after a night-long fight with Nigerian troops; in a simultaneous attack, Boko Haram attacked Maiduguri, but Nigerian troops were able to drive fighters away from the city.
Boko Haram attacked and seized the town of Monguno after a night-long fight with Nigerian troops; in a simultaneous attack, Boko Haram attacked Maiduguri, but Nigerian troops were able to drive fighters away from the city.
Nigerian fighter jets bombed a Boko Haram-held town Malam Fatori.
Angry youth threw stones at president Goodluck Jonathan's convoy, protesting government's failure to fight Boko Haram insurgents.
Nigerian military reclaimed the town of Michika from Boko Haram insurgents.
Nigerian military and civilian vigilanties, with air and ground support from Chad and Cameroon forces, retook Gamboru, Mafa, Mallam Fatori, Abadam, and Marte from Boko Haram. 
Nigerian military and civilian vigilanties, with air and ground support from Chad and Cameroon forces, retook Gamboru, Mafa, Mallam Fatori, Abadam, and Marte from Boko Haram. 
Nigerian military and civilian vigilanties, with air and ground support from Chad and Cameroon forces, retook Gamboru, Mafa, Mallam Fatori, Abadam, and Marte from Boko Haram. 
Nigerian military and civilian vigilanties, with air and ground support from Chad and Cameroon forces, retook Gamboru, Mafa, Mallam Fatori, Abadam, and Marte from Boko Haram. 
Nigerian military and civilian vigilanties, with air and ground support from Chad and Cameroon forces, retook Gamboru, Mafa, Mallam Fatori, Abadam, and Marte from Boko Haram. 
Two suicide bombers attacked a traffic cirle, injuring multiple people.
A suicide bomber attacked a timber market, injuring a few people.
Two simultaneous blasts in Gombe killed 5 people at a market and a checkpoint.
Military repelled Boko Haram's attack on Maiduguri.
A suicide bomber killed 7 people outside of Sabo Garbu's home, who is running for a seat in the lower house of parliament on behalf of the ruling People's Democratic Party.
A suicide bomber attacked a campaign venue rights after president Goodluck Jonathan's departure.
Crowds of angry youths attacked People's Democratic Party supporters after a rally for president Goodluck Jonathan, denouncing his visit, claiming that it led to suicide bomber attacks.
Unknown gunmen kidnapped 4 oil workers on a speedboat in Southern Ijaw.
Unknown gunmen attacked a cargo ship near the Qua Iboe oil terminal, killing one and kidnapping 3 crew members.
Boko Haram attacked a bus in a village of Akada-Banga, hidnapping 20 women and girls. 
Militants stormed a police station in Kanamma, killing several people. 
Boko Haram attacked Gamboru, recently seized by Chadian and Nigerian forces, but was repelled by the Chadian military.
A female suicide bomber attacked a market in Biu, killing 7 people.
Boko Haram raided two villages, killing 21 people.
Boko Haram raided two villages, killing 21 people.
Boko Haram attacked Gombe, throwing leaflets calling for locals to shun the elections. The attack was repelled by Nigerian forces.
A suicide bomber killed 7 people in an attack at a bus station in Damaturu.
Boko Haram  attacked a town of Askira Uba, targeting the palace of the local chief, public and private buildings. 
Nigeria's military reclaimed the city of Monguno from Boko Haram fighters, who captured it earlier in 2015. 
A suicide bomber attacked a restaurant in Potiskum, killing 2 people.
Three suicide bombers detonated explosives at a checkpoint in Yamarkumi village, killing 36 people.
Unknown gunmen killed a police officer and injured others at an All Progressives Congress (APC) election rally in Okrika.
Chadian troops engaged in combat with Boko Haram near the town of Dikwa.
Boko Haram torched villages near Chibok, killing at least 30 people.
Boko Haram torched villages near Chibok, killing at least 30 people.
Bokok Haram attacked at least 4 villages in Adamawa state, killing at least 40 people.
Nigerian military carried out air strikes on Gwoza, held by Boko Haram, killing "a large number of terrorists"
Nigerian army recaptured Baga from Boko Haram.
A suicide bomber killed 7 people in an attack on a market in Potiskum.
An American missionary was kidnapped in the Emiworo village by unknown gunmen, ransom is a suspected motive.
A suicide bomber killed 17 people at a bus stop in Potiskum.
Two suicide bombers killed 34 people at a bus terminal in Potiskum.
Boko Haram raided over a dozen villages in Northwest Nigeria, stealing cattle and targeting Shuwa tribes, who are from the same ethnic group as Chadian troops, in retaliation for Chadian attacks. 
An angry mob chased away troops at military checkpoints near a bus station, protesting military's inability to stop attacks.
A suicide bomber killed 18 people at a bus station, the second bomber was shot dead before he could detonate his explosives.
Two unknown assailants threw explosives at a bus station from a moving car, killing 17 people.
A suicide bomber killed 3 and an accomplice at a bus station in Ngamdu.
An angry mob killed a girl who was suspected to be a suicide bomber.
Boko Haram raided multiple villages in Northwest Nigeria, kiling Shuwa-Arabs, who are from the same ethnic group as Chadian troops, in retaliation of Chadian attacks on Boko Haram.
Boko Haram killed elderly men praying outside of a local cleric's home in Gwoza.
Boko Haram attacked Njaba village, killing 68 people.
Chadian troops seized the town of Dikwa, but with heavy civilian casualties.
Boko Haram attacked Konduga and was repelled by Nigerian troops and civilian vigilantes, who killed 73 Boko Haram members.
Three sequential attacks in Maiduguri killed at least 58 people, injuring over a hunderd.
Niger and Chad forces retook Damasak from Bokok Haram; 200 insurgents and 10 Chadian soldiers were killed.
Nigerian troops repelled a Bokok Haram attack on Gombi.
A suicide bomber killed at leats 7 people in Maiduguri.
Chad forces attacked Boko Haram in Ndaba, killing "several" soldiers.
Unknown gunmen kidnapped 3 Chinese nationals and killed a policeman in a shootout.
Hedsmen attacked a village, killing 45 farmers.
Nigerian troop recaptured Bama, Goniri and another town from Boko Haram.
Nigerian troop recaptured Bama, Goniri and another town from Boko Haram.
Boko Haram attacked Gamboru, killing 11 people.
Boko Haram insurgents killed dozens of women in Bama, who they married when the seized the town earlier.
Troops recaptured Gwoza from Boko Haram; many women were purposefully killed by Boko Haram before retreating.
23 people were beheaded in Buratai by Boko Haram.
Boko Haram shot at least 7 voters in multiple villages.
Boko Haram shot at least 7 voters in multiple villages.
Boko Haram shot at least 7 voters in multiple villages.
Boko Haram shot at least 7 voters in multiple villages.
Niger and Chad troops destroyed a Boko Haram base and killed 54 insurgents in a border town of Talagam.
Boko Haram attacked and burned ckecpoints, police stations, office of the paramilitary Nigeria Security and Civil Defence force, and the local electoral commission premises in Alkaleri.
Boko Haram attacked polling stations and destroyed ballot boxes in Bauchi.
Two civilians and a soldier were shot by unknown gunmen in Southern Rivers state.
Boko Haram attacked Miringa in Borno state, torching people's homes and killing 25 civilians.
People's Democratic Party protested All Progressives Congress's call for results of the elction to be cancelled.
Thousands of All Progressive Congress women supporters demanded cancellation of election results in Rivers state, and accused the Peoples Democratic Party of vote-rigging, but were dispearsed with tear gas by the police.
Two car bombs exploded near polling stations in the southeast of Rivers state, but killed noone. 
Nigerian troops and jets intercepted Boko Haram in Dungulbe near Bauchi city.
An electoral comission's office was bombed in Port Harcourt.
Boko Haram attacked civilians, including a state legislator in Biri and Dukku, killing 14 people.
Boko Haram attacked civilians, including a state legislator in Biri and Dukku, killing 14 people.
Boko Haram fighters attacked three villages and killed 3 vigilante fighters, but were intercepted by troops, 8 insurgents were killed.
Boko Haram fighters attacked three villages and killed 3 vigilante fighters, but were intercepted by troops, 8 insurgents were killed.
Boko Haram fighters attacked three villages and killed 3 vigilante fighters, but were intercepted by troops, 8 insurgents were killed.
People's Democratic Party held a sit-down protest, accusing the Independent National Electoral Commission of partiality.
An unknown bomber left an explosive at a bus station in Gombe, killing 5 people and injuring 15. 
Boko Haram ambushed and killed 9 and injured 16 Chad soldiers near Malam Fatori.
Boko Haram raided a market in Kayamla village near Maiduguri, killing at least 4 people and looting food and cattle.
Boko Haram opened fire on villagers and raided homes, killing at least two dozen people.
Three people were kidnapped by pirates from an oil industry supply vessel off the coast of Nigeria.
Boko Haram stromed Buratai village and killed two people.
Unknown attackers bombed a local electoral office in Buguma.
A few dozen people marched in Abuja, protesting the kidnapping of Chibok girls and demanding their rescue.
219 schoolgirls marched through Abuja demanding the release of Chibok girls kidnapped 1 year ago by Boko Haram, as well as safe education for women in the country.
Residents of Chibok and families of kidnapped Chibok girls gathered at the ruins of the school from which the girls were kidnappen a year ago to demand their rescue.
Air traffic controllers protested across the country demanding pay increases and work condition improvements.
Ologba and Egba communities clashed in Agatu local government area over fishing rights; Egba villagers accused the Ologba villagers of aiding Fulani herdsmen in an attack on Egba that happened a month ago. 
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives near a Shiite mosque severely injuring himself and a couple others.
Boko Haram launched a rocket attack on a military vehicle in the northeast Nigerian town of Baga, killing 2 soldiers and injuring several.
Boko Haram fighters disguised as soldiers intercepted a group of 21 people at Bultaram village trying to return to their homes and opened fire, killing all 21 men.
Troops captured and destroyed 3 Boko Haram camps in the Sambisa forest and rescued 200 girls and 93 women.
Tarok villagers killed 6 soldiers in Wase and mutilated their bodies.
234 women and children were rescued through the Kawuri and Konduga end of Sambisa forest; at least 13 women were killed during the rescue operation by either Boko Haram or Nigerian troops advancing.
According to a military account, soldiers attacked villages around Wase, targeting Tarok militant group, which killed 6 soldiers a week ago, killing 32 militants. According to the community account, the soldiers targeted all Tarok, killed dozens of civilians and razed homes. According to various estimates 28 to 38 to 80 people were killed in violence.
Troops rescued 25  children and women from Boko Haram as they destroyed seven Boko Haram camps in Sambisa Forest. 1 soldier was killed. 
An unknown gunman opened fire on a school in Potiskum, wounding 12 students, and then detonated his suicide belt.
Oil tanker drivers and oil an gas workers went on strike protesting delay in the payment of their salaries amid an energy crisis.
Troops attacked Boko Haram camp near Mafa, inflicting "huge" casualties.
Boko Haram fighters attacked Bale and Kayamla villages and then moved to Maiduguri, but were repelled by Nigerian troops. 76 people died, including 55 villagers, 36 civilians, soldiers, and vigilantes and dozens of Boko Haram fighters.
Boko Haram fighters attacked Bale and Kayamla villages and then moved to Maiduguri, but were repelled by Nigerian troops. 76 people died, including 55 villagers, 36 civilians, soldiers, and vigilantes and dozens of Boko Haram fighters.
Boko Haram fighters attacked Bale and Kayamla villages and then moved to Maiduguri, but were repelled by Nigerian troops. 76 people died, including 55 villagers, 36 civilians, soldiers, and vigilantes and dozens of Boko Haram fighters.
Boko Haram seized a border town Marte.
Hunderds of textile dyers protested against Chinese "takeover" of the textiles industry.
A suicide bomber killed 7 people and injured 31 at a bus station in Damaturu.
Boko Haram attacked Sabon Gari Hyembula, killing 1 to 3 men and kidnapping 6 women, as well as stealing food.
Nigerian troops overran 10 Boko Haram camps in Sambisa Forest, killing militants. One soldier was killed.
A suicide bomber killed 8 people at a livestock market in Garkida.
Fulani Muslims stormed Ninji and Ropp villages raiding cattle and killing 6 to 27 people, according to various reports.
Fulani Muslims stormed Ninji and Ropp villages raiding cattle and killing 6 to 27 people, according to various reports.
Hundreds of rioting Muslims set a Shariah court on fire in Kano, protesting its decision to free a cleric accused of insulting the prophet Mohammed. The protest became peaceful after the fire.
Boko Haram killed 10 people in Pambula-Kwamda village.
Nigerian troops attacked Boko Haram camps in Sambisa forest, killing "scores" of fighters and rescuing 20 women and children.
Boko Haram atacked Gubio village, killing civilians and burning homes; military reinforcements were able to push Boko Haram out of the village. 
Fulani herdsmen attacked three villages killing 23 farmers.
Nigerian fighter jets bombed four villages occupied by Boko Haram near the border with Cameroon.
Nigerian fighter jets bombed four villages occupied by Boko Haram near the border with Cameroon.
Nigerian fighter jets bombed four villages occupied by Boko Haram near the border with Cameroon.
Nigerian fighter jets bombed four villages occupied by Boko Haram near the border with Cameroon.
Nigerian troops repelled a Boko Haram attack on Mafa, killing over 30 insurgents.
Boko Haram fired rocket-propelled grenades into homes on the outskirts of Maiduguri, but were repelled by Nigerian troops. At least 13 people were killed.
Boko Haram raided two towns, torching public buildings and looting food and fuel stores. Troops arriving from Potiskum were outnumbered and froced to withdraw.
Boko Haram raided two towns, torching public buildings and looting food and fuel stores. Troops arriving from Potiskum were outnumbered and froced to withdraw.
A suicide bomber attacked a mosque in Maiduguri, killing 16 to 26 people.
A suicide bomber attacked a market in Maidugiri, injuring 4 people.
Boko Haram bombarded the outskirts of Maiduguri with rocket-propelled grenades.
A suicide bomber killed 13 people and injured 24 at a market in Maiduguri; the crowd started stoning the rescue workers for unknown reasons, but was dispersed by soldiers.
An explosion outside a millitary facility killed at least 18 people.
An explosion killed 6 to 11 people in Maiduguri; "panicked" soldiers fired into air.
An explosion killed 4 soldiers when a truck carrying firewood rammed into a checkpoint.
Troops repelled a Boko Haram attack on Shetimari village and killed several insurgents.
An explosion killed 31 at a market in Yola.
Suicide bomber killed two and injured 4 outside a military checkpoint.
An explosion injured multiple people in Tungushe village, Borno state.
Boko Haram attacked Huyum village in Borno state, burning homes and killing at least 15 people.
Boko Haram attacked three villages in Borno state, burning homes, looting, and killing 43 people.
Boko Haram attacked three villages in Borno state, burning homes, looting, and killing 43 people.
Boko Haram attacked three villages in Borno state, burning homes, looting, and killing 43 people.
A suicide bomber killed 8 people at a civilian vigilante office.
A suicide bomber killed 2 at a tavern in Potiskum.
Fulani hersmen killed 8 farmers on their way to a crop field in Sondi village in Wukari district.
Suicide bombers killed 30 people near a mosque in Maiduguri.
Boko Haram killed 42 people in attacks on Debiro Hawul and Debiro Biu villages in Borno state.
Boko Haram killed 42 people in attacks on Debiro Hawul and Debiro Biu villages in Borno state.
A suicide bomber killed 20 at a bus station in Maiduguri.
A suicide bomber killed 10 and injured 30 at a market in Wagir, in the Gujba.
A suicide bomber killed at least five and injured 10 people at a hospital in Maiduguri.
Boko Haram attacked 3 villages in Borno state, killing 150 people in mosques, singling out men and boys, and setting homes on fire. The military responded with aerial bombardment of Boko Haram positions.
Boko Haram attacked 3 villages in Borno state, killing 150 people in mosques, singling out men and boys, and setting homes on fire. The military responded with aerial bombardment of Boko Haram positions.
Boko Haram attacked 3 villages in Borno state, killing 150 people in mosques, singling out men and boys, and setting homes on fire. The military responded with aerial bombardment of Boko Haram positions.
Boko Haram dragged men out of houses in Miringa village and shot them for escaping forced conscription.
A suicide bomber killed 12 people at a mosque in Malari village in Borno state.
Boko Haram killed 25 people in Mussa village.
Boko Haram attacked Zabarmari village near Maiduguri; as Boko Haram was advancing, 6 suicide bombers blew themselves up and killed "scores" of people, wounding over 100; Nigerian troops repelled the attack after calling for reinforcements.
Unknown gunmen attacked two villages in Zamfara state, killing 39 people and stealing cattle.
Unknown gunmen attacked two villages in Zamfara state, killing 39 people and stealing cattle.
Unknown attackers opened fire on a mosque in Jos, killing 19 people.
An explosion at a restaurant in Jos killed 25 people.
A suicide bomber killed 5 at a church in Potiskum.
A suicide bomber killed 4 people at a checkpoint in Sabon Gari village.
An explosion killed 25 people at a government office in Zaria.
Hundreds of members of a campaign group calling for the release of 219 schoolgirls kidnapped by Boko Haram marched on Nigeria's presidential villa on Wednesday to demand government action.
Eight men were killed by Boko Haram when they returned to Gamboru to inspect their homes.
An explosion killed noone at a Federal High Court in Port Harcourt as a judge was expected to rule on a disputed election result.
Boko Haram raided Ngamdu village, killing 11 people, and seizing control of a highway to Maiduguri.
A suicide attack in Maiduguri killed 2 pedestrians at a bus station.
Boko Haram attacked Kalwa, Misala, Kilwa, and Gwollam villages killing 42 people, burning homes and raiding cattle.
Boko Haram attacked Kalwa, Misala, Kilwa, and Gwollam villages killing 42 people, burning homes and raiding cattle.
Boko Haram attacked Kalwa, Misala, Kilwa, and Gwollam villages killing 42 people, burning homes and raiding cattle.
Boko Haram attacked Kalwa, Misala, Kilwa, and Gwollam villages killing 42 people, burning homes and raiding cattle.
A suicide bomber killed 4 people at a checkpoint in Maiduguri.
Boko Haram attacked motorists from a barricade on the Damaturu-Maiduguri highway just outside of Ngamdu village and then moved to Ngamdu burning homes.
Boko Haram attacked a vehicle with civilians trying to return to Baga near Garin-Giwa village, killing 8 people and forcing others to flee.
Boko Haram attacked Damasak, killing at least 5 people.
Twin blasts killed 49 people in an attack on a market in Gombe.
Suicide bombers killed 13 Muslims celebrating the end of Ramadan near a mosque in Damaturu.
A car exploded at a police checkpoint while it was searched, killing 6 people, including 3 police officers.
A suicide bomber injured one person in a failed attack on a checkpoint in Biu.
Boko Haram attacked a native village of Nigeria's chief of army, killing 2 people and burning several homes.
More than 40 people were killed during 2 explosions at bus stations in Gombe.
Boko Haram stormed Pompomari village, targeting the home of the village chief, killing 8 people.
Boko Haram stormed Kopa, Maikadiri and Yaffa villages, killing at least 25 people and burning homes.
Boko Haram stormed Kopa, Maikadiri and Yaffa villages, killing at least 25 people and burning homes.
Boko Haram stormed Kopa, Maikadiri and Yaffa villages, killing at least 25 people and burning homes.
A suicide bomber killed at least 14 people at a market in Damaturu.
Nigerian troops freed 30 people from Boko Haram.
Villagers killed two Boko Haram members who entered their village.
Boko Haram fighters attacked Dille village, but were ambushed by Nigerian troops; 11 Boko Haram extremists and 3 civilian vigilantes were killed.
Nigerian troops freed 71 people from Boko Haram in Borno state; a "number of terrorists" were killed during the operation.
Nigerian troops freed 71 people from Boko Haram in Borno state; a "number of terrorists" were killed during the operation.
Boko Haram killed 10 fishermen in three villages near Baga on the shores of Lake Chad.
Boko Haram killed 10 fishermen in three villages near Baga on the shores of Lake Chad.
Boko Haram killed 10 fishermen in three villages near Baga on the shores of Lake Chad.
A suicide bomber killed 6 people at a market in Maiduguri.
Boko Haram killed at least 10 local vigilantes in Kukuwa-Gari as a reprisal for the killing of two Boko Haram members a couple days ago; Boko Haram members burnt homes, livestock and silos.
Boko Haram killed 13 people in Malari and burned homes, accusing villagers of informing the military on Boko Haram whereabouts.
Nigerian air force attacked Boko Haram in the northeast of the country, including the village of Bita, where aerial bombings precluded a Boko Haram attack on the village. 178 kidnappen people were resceued and multiple Boko Haram camps destroyed.
Boko Haram attacked a convoy on the road from Baga to Monguno, killing 9 fishermen; soldiers accompanying the convoy killed 13 Boko Haram members.
Boko Haram attacked two villages in Yobe state, killing at least 9 people, looting food, and burning homes.
Boko Haram attacked two villages in Yobe state, killing at least 9 people, looting food, and burning homes.
Pirates attacked a military base in Nembe, killing 4 soldiers and one policeman and stealing guns from the base; militants' base was attacked and destroyed the next day by Nigerian troops, 6 suspects were arrested.
Boko Haram attacked a bus near Nwajurko village in Borno state, killing 4 people and kidnapping 5.
A suicide bomber killed 50 people at a market in Sabon Gari village in Borno state.
Boko Haram attacked Kukuwa-Gari village, killing many and forcing other to flee across the river; 160 were shot or drowned as a result of attack.
Boko Haram attacked Awonori village, killing 7 people, looting food and livestock.
Boko Haram attacked Nigerian army chief's convoy near Faljari village in Borno state; 10 Boko Haram members and one soldier were killed.
Nigerian air force attacked Boko Haram's trailers believed to be carrying logistics support for the insurgents.
Two suicide bombers killed a soldier at a checkpoint in Maiduguri.
Boko Haram killed 28 people in an attack on two villages in Borno state.
Boko Haram killed 28 people in an attack on two villages in Borno state.
A suicide bomber killed 6 and injured dozens at a bus station in Damaturu.
Dozens protested in Abuja to commemorate 500 days since the kidnapping of 276 girls in Chibok.
Boko Haram attacked 3 villages, killing between 56 and 80 people.
Boko Haram attacked 3 villages, killing between 56 and 80 people.
Boko Haram attacked 3 villages, killing between 56 and 80 people.
Boko Haram attacked Fatawe village, killing several dozens of people.
Nigerian troops recaptured Gamboru Ngala from Boko Haram.
Boko Haram attacked Kolori and the neighboring village of Baana-imam, killing 26 people.
Boko Haram attacked Kolori and the neighboring village of Baana-imam, killing 26 people.
A suicide bomber killed at least two at a checkpoint in Madagali.
A bomb exploded in Malkohi refugee camp, killing at least 7 people.
Nigerian troops attacked Boko Haram camps in Borno state and rescued dozens of people.
Unknown gunmen killed 5 Christian farmers in Kaduna and burned homes.
A bomb killed at least 20 at a market in Monguno.
Boko Haram executed three coordinated bombings in Maiduguri, killing at least 117 people and injuring dozens.
Nigerian troops destroyed multipe Boko Haram camps, detained 43 extremists and freed 241 women and girls.
Nigerian troops destroyed multipe Boko Haram camps, detained 43 extremists and freed 241 women and girls.
Fulani herdsmen killed 4 people in Alawa, including a policeman and a village chief.
Nigerian troops retook Banki village, claiming the surrender of 200 Boko Haram members.
Boko Haram attacked Mailari village, killing 9 people.
A series of up to 7 explosions occurred in Maiduguri, killing at least 10 people.
Multiple blasts on the outskirts of Abuja killed at least 18 people; Boko Haram claimed responsibility.
Boko Haram attacked multiple villages in Adamawa state, killing at least 11 people.
Boko Haram attacked multiple villages in Adamawa state, killing at least 11 people.
Boko Haram attacked multiple villages in Adamawa state, killing at least 11 people.
Two suicide bombers killed at least 18 people in Damaturu.
Two suicide bombers killed 10 Fulani hersmen on the outskirts of Damaturu.
Two suicide bombers killed 12 people at a mosque in Gubio.
Boko Haram attacked a military camp in Yobe state, but were repelled by Nigerian troops; 100 Boko Haram members and 7 soldiers died.
Armed militants attacked an oil flow station in Niger Delta region, killing one guard.
Three suicide bombings in Maiduguri killed at least 4 people.
Suicide bombers killed at least 30 people at a mosque in Molai.
Suicide bombers killed 4 to 18 people in Umarari.
Boko Haram attacked Dar village, killing at least 11 people, including by suicide bombers who pretended to be a part of the fleeing crowd.
Soldiers shot a suicide bomber at Maimalari army barracks near Maiduguri.
Nigerian troops and civilian vigilantes attacked Boko Haram, killing at least 150 extremists and rescuing 36 women and children.
Nigerian troops and civilian vigilantes attacked Boko Haram, killing at least 150 extremists and rescuing 36 women and children.
Boko Haram opened fire on four vehicles on a highway outside of Jingalta, killing 20 people and then looted and burned the entire village.
A suicide bomber killed at least 27 at a mosque in Yola.
A suicide bomber killed at least 15 at a mosque in Maiduguri.
Four suicide bombers blew themselves up killing one other person and wounding 10, when civilian guards prevented them from entering the city of Maiduguri.
Boko Haram extremists attacked remote northeast Nigerian villages, killing scores, kidnapping hundreds of women and children, and stealing cattle.
Nigerian troops rescued 338 kidnapped children and women from Boko Haram camps in Sambisa forest. 30 extremists were killed.
Nigerian troops drove Boko Haram out of an abandoned school building, killing 4 militants.
7 people were killed and 15 injured in fighting between supporters of PDP and APC in Wukari following the election tribunal verdict overturning the governorship election in favour of the APC. The event started as a celebration of APC's candidate's victory by APC supporters.
Hundreds of Indigenous People of Biafra supporters marched in Port Harcourt, demanding release of a key activist who operated an illegal radio station calling for a separate state of Biafra. The protest was dispersed by police.
Nigerian troops killed four Boko Haram suspects and set free 61 people.
Nigerian troops foiled a planned Boko Haram attack on Maiduguri.
A blast in Yola killed at least 30 people.
Two suicide bombers killed at least 15 people at a market in Kano.
Thousands of protesters took to the streets in Aba to demand the release of an activist who operated an illegal radio station calling for a separate state of Biafra.
A suicide bomber detonated her explosives when arriving with a group of IDPs at a checkpoint near Maiduguri, killing 8 people.
Polish seamen were abducted from a Polish cargo ship in Nigerian waters by unknown attackers.
A suicide bomber killed 22 people in an attack on a Shiite Muslim procession in Dakasoye village near Kano. Boko Haram claimed responsibility for the attack.
Boko Haram kidnapped girls and set  buildings on fire in Bam-Buratai in Borno state.
Boko Haram destroyed a Nigerian military base as soldiers fled; the attack was later repelled with the help of military reinforcements.
Protesters blocked a strategic bridge across the Niger river, which links the southeast with the rest of the country, demanding Biafra independence. 10 people, including 2 police officers, were killed when the peaceful protest grew violent and police fired at the crowd.
A suicide bomber killed 3 at a security checkpoint in Sabon Gari.
Boko Haram attacked Takulashi village twice in two days, stealing cattle, looting, and burning homes.
A woman was killed when unknown gunmen fired at Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) supporters during polling for a governor of Bayelsa state.
Boko Haram killed 14 people in Kamuya village.
Islamic Movement of Nigeria (IMN) attacked a convoy of the Nigeria's army chief by blocking a road, throwing stones and/or firing gunshots, according to different accounts. Nigerian soldiers attacked the crowd and, later in the day, besieged the home of the leader of the Shiite movement and arrested him. According to different reports, the death toll ranged from 12 to multiple hundreds.
Boko Haram attacked 3 villages in Borno state, killing 30 people.
Boko Haram attacked 3 villages in Borno state, killing 30 people.
Boko Haram attacked 3 villages in Borno state, killing 30 people.
Soldiers killed 4 people during a protest of Shiite Mulsilms against the detention of the leader of the Islamic Movement of Nigeria (IMN).
Suicide bombers killed a vigilante at a checkpoint in Mafa, Borno state.
Boko Haram attacked Buratai village, triggering a gunbattle with troops.
The sister of the governor of the Bayelsa state was kidnapped in Yenagoa.
Suicide bombers killed 6 people when stopped for a security check by civilian vigilantes.
Hundreds of Shiite Mulsims protested, demanding the release of Islamic Movement of Nigeria's (IMN) leader after he was arrested in an attack in Zaria.
Boko Haram attacked Kimba village, killing at least 14 people and burning homes.
Boko Haram attacked the outskirts of Maiduguri engaging in a battle with Nigerian soldiers. 22 people were killed by suicide bomber attacks and rocket-propelled grenades.
Suicide bombers killed 30 people in Madagali.
Students riot over political reforms that fall short of multi-party democracy.
Workers strike demanding better pay and working conditions.
Unemployed workers strike against austerity program put in place to receive money from Western nations.
Protesters riot and hold hostage three oil executives in response to the murder of opposition leader Joseph Rendjame.  Protesters demand the removal of Pres. Bongo from office.
Protesters riot and hold hostage three oil executives in response to the murder of opposition leader Joseph Rendjame.  Protesters demand the removal of Pres. Bongo from office.
Teachers strike demanding better pay and educational facilities.
Teachers march demanding better pay, educational facilities, and protests use of violence against student protesters.
Workers strike demanding better pay, working conditions and multi-party democracy.
Soccer fans riot when Gabon team is elimnated from the finals of the pan-African competition.
Opposition supporters protest government methods of registering voters for elections.
Opposition supporters protest early elections results claiming Bongo received nearly 100% of the vote.
Youths riot over election results.
Opposition supporters march through Libreville protesting results of the Presidential election.
Opposition supporters violently protest the declaration of Pres. Bongo winning the election.
Trade unions call for a 72 hour general strike to demand higher salaries.  Strike was largely ignored especially on days two and three.
Rioters protest Pres. Bongo, low wages and missing opposition leaders.  Police burn offices of Radio Liberty.
Troops surround  and enter the home of opposition leader Rev. Mba Abessole with orders to take him dead or alive.  Abessole and his family had fled the day prior.
Air-Gabon workers strike, demanding salary increases and bonuses.
Protesters demonstrate outside French embassy in response to French trial in which call girls accuse Pres. Bongo of having AIDS.
Students protest over unpaid scholarships.
Civil servants strike demanding better pay.  General strike was called for, approximately 30,000 were expected to participate but only  a few hundred actually did.
Angry voters destroy ballot boxes over incomplete voter lists.
Civil servants and students stage intermittent demonstrations over campus conditions.
Rebels loyal to the ex-president kill a mining official.
University professors and academic staff strike over access to property, research bonuses and investments for overhaul of the universities.
University professors and academic staff strike over access to property, research bonuses and investments for overhaul of the universities.
University teachers strike over pay increases, payment of arrears and hiring full time teachers.  Students protest the possibility of loosing a full academic year.
University teachers strike over pay increases, payment of arrears and hiring full time teachers.  Students protest the possibility of loosing a full academic year.
Opposition supporters vandalize polling stations and ballot boxes.
Opposition supporters vandalize polling stations and ballot boxes.
Defeated opposition candidate hired thugs to attack young women at the Health College at Mouila in protest of election results.
Teachers strike demanding increased pay, new schools and free textbooks for students.
Teachers strike demanding increased pay, new schools and free textbooks for students.
Students storm college campuses, cause unknown.
Students storm college campuses, cause unknown.
Villagers protest demanding return of electricity to the region and school supplies.
Villagers attack a police station after learning that a protester was killed by security forces.
University students strike demanding the reopening of the university restaurant.
Youths attack opposition leader Pierre Mamboundou to prevent him from holding presidential campaign rallies.
Youths riot over re-election of Pres. Bongo.
Opposition groups hold press confrence claiming fraud in the presidential election, while supporters demonstrate outside.
Demonstrators protest high cost of living.
Security force raid GPU's headquarters and conduct house-by-house searches. Officials claim they were looking for weapons.
Oil workers strike over difficult working conditions.
Demonstrators protest high cost of food.
Air traffic controllers strike demanding monthly bonuses among other things.
Air traffic controllers strike demanding pay raises.
Doctors and nurses strike demanding higher housing allowances.
Teachers strike for higher wages.
Protesters demonstrate against French non-governmental groups that claim Pres. Bongo has obtained luxury homes in France with embezzled money.
Health care workers strike for higher wages and better means of treating patients.  Public hospital employees controlled by both the health ministry and the labor ministry strike at the same time.
Prisoners riot and take several foreign prisoners hostage.  Police fight their way into the prison.
Teachers strike to force the government to accede to a wage accord that ended a previous strike.
A small protest group demands that the president resign.  The police peacefully break up the protest because they did not have a permit.
Thousands of protesters demonstrate against defense minister Ali Ben Bongo, son of the late president, because he intends to run for his father's office.  The protesters begin throwing rocks, and the police use tear gas.
A presidential contender stages a hunger strike, charging that the forthcoming elections are full of irregularities.  Event ends when the contender is hospitalized.
Thousands of supporters of a presidential candidate gather in front of the electoral commission to protest after a disputed presidential election.  The next day, police fire tear gas into the crowds as the election results are announced.
Thousands of supporters of a presidential candidate gather in front of the electoral commission to protest after a disputed presidential election.  The next day, police fire tear gas into the crowds as the election results are announced.
Thousands of supporters of a presidential candidate gather in front of the electoral commission to protest after a disputed presidential election.  The next day, police fire tear gas into the crowds as the election results are announced.
Thousands of supporters of a presidential candidate gather in front of the electoral commission to protest after a disputed presidential election.  The next day, police fire tear gas into the crowds as the election results are announced.
Five gunmen attack a tv station owned by a presidential candidate in the aftermath of a disputed presidential election.
An opposition candidate begins a hunger strike to protest recent elections.
Students protest non-payment of grants.
Municipal workers protest over non-payment of wages.
Oil workers strike, protesting jobs going to foreign workers.
A failed presidential candidate declares himself the winner of an election, in events directly inspired by those in the Ivory Coast.  30 of his supporters protest in the streets, but they are dispersed by police with tear gas.
The oil worker's union strikes to restrict the employment of foreign workers.
Teachers strike for many months.
Leaders of the Conasysed (National Convention of Education Sector Trade Unions) begin a hunger strike to pressure the government to pay them their salaries.
Students of Omar Bongo university demanded that scholarships be paid and protested against the 27 year age limit for scholarships.  The proteste turned violent after police arrived.  Two were arrested, and three students were wounded.  Students and police clashed for similar reasons in January.
Students and Police clashed at Omar Bongo university, again over scholarship payments.  Students threw stones at police who were there at the school ractor's request.  Police responded with teargas.  Students then began burning things in the street to stop traffic
19 Omar Bongo university students were arrested after their strike led them to clash with police.  They were released a few days later on bail.
Enough is Enough held a protest against the National Communications Control
Police broke up an unauthorized demonstration in support of main opposition, Andre Mba Obame.  The protest turned violent as demonstrators  set up barricades and burned cars and trash cans while police launched teargas.  Of the approximately 2,000 demonstrators, 57 were arrested, dozens were injured, and one woman was killed.
Armed men attacke and set fire to the TV+ station, an oppostition television network.
The outlawed opposition party, National Union, staged a protest calling for a national conference and sweeping reforms.  1,500 people attended the protest.
Six men entered the opposition-owned TV+ station, attacked and injured a guard, before fleeing when more guards arrived.
Employees at Gabon's sole oil refinery launched a strike over redundancies and the closure of several employee medical services
Students and anti-riot police clashed over non-payment of bursaries
Thousands of people marched to protest ritual killings
Protesters demonstrating against the participation of first lady Ondimba in a protest against ritual killings on the same day
Pirates hijacked an oil tanker with a 20-person crew and released the tanker in Nigerian waters on 7/22 after stealing crude oil and oil products
Students and teachers protested against poorly paid teaching posts and against overcrowded classrooms
Students protest education reform and final high school exam results
Opposition demands the resignation of president Ali Bongo Ondimba
Ping is an opposition figure to Ondimba and 200 youths supposedly recruited by Ondimba surrounded Ping's home for unknown reasons. 
Teachers, public and private sector workers are on strike demanding backpay and low wages. 
Andre Mba Obame's death sparked violent riots in Gabon, resulting in the tourching of Benin's embassy in Gabon. 
There have been clashes between opposition supporters and police for unknown reasons sparked by Obame's death. 
Teacher strike, demanding democracy.  Retrospective reporting from 1993 notes that schools are closed for four years in a row due to strikes.
Civil servants strike over overdue wages.
protesters clash with police in the capital.  Police use tear gas.
Private sector employees strike seeking pay raises.
Students organize a strike in the capital to force military ruler Andre Kolingba to convene a national conference.  The strike is widely followed by public transport workers and traders.
General strike in the capital over pay issues.  Police use tear gas against demonstrators when they stone vehicles (coded as riot escalation).
Violent protest.  Police crack down with tear gas.  34 arrested.
Schools closed by strikes over back pay.
Govt. arrests unknown number of trade unionists.
protesters attack French citizens demanding that France back the fight to end Andre Kolingba's reign.  Students protest kidnapping of student union leader and call for prime minister's resignation.
protesters support a general strike.  Between 7 and 20 people are killed.  The strike and the incident are described retrospectively only.  Few details are given.
Students protest having no school due to strikes.  Govt. disperses.
Two policemen hurt when teargas grenades explode in their hands.
Young protesters wreck vehicles beloning to World Bank educational project.
Peaceful protest
Teachers strike, demanding reinstatement of five colleagues fired by the president.
Pro democracy protest.  One protester is bludgeoned to death.
Violent protest reported retrospectively.  Number, location, and cause not given.
Strike reported retrospectively.
Military forces seize a radio station and surround the presidential office, demanding back pay.  A civilian is shot when troops try to requisition his car.
Election related violence.  Goumba supporters attack the home of one of Kolingba's allies.  The Presidential Guard intervenes.
Staff of UDEAC strikes over back pay.
A military tribunal sentences 4 paramilitary police to death for killing a demonstrator in 1992.  A riot ensues in the courtroom.
2000 teachers march demanding back pay.
Strike over backpay.
400 soldiers mutiny in the capital over back pay.  Loyalist and French troops join in fighting the mutiny.
1996 Central African Republic Government
5000 demonstrators urge rebel soldiers and loyalist forces to remove roadblocks around the city.
Civilians protest a continuing mutiny.  Soldiers fire into the crowd, but no one is hurt.
Sudden renewed fighting between govt. and mutineers of event 28.
Armed men try unsuccessfully to kidnap the defense minister.
3 former mutineers attack a govt. attack a police station and are killed.
Renewed mutiny.  Fighting breaks out with mutineers on one side, and peacekeepers, loyalists, and French troops on the other.
Students protest payment of bursaries.  Police break up the protest.
Students protest over payment of scholarships.
300 teachers strike over salary arrears.  They stage protest on 12/15, but police disperse the demonstration.
Bandits ambush a bus and rob the survivors.
Students seize a policeman after he fails to respect a break for the raising of the national flag.  Police respond with force, killing 1.
Strike over backpay.
Sudanese rebels attack a refugee camp.
Armed political supporters attack each other ahead of an election.  Violence is connected to Takoma and Nzakara ethnic groups.
Armed political supporters attack each other ahead of an election.  Violence is connected to Takoma and Nzakara ethnic groups.
A bomb explodes outside the French embassy.  No one is hurt.
Violence ahead of a run-off election.
Violent protests break out when an opposition movement calls for a city-wide shit down to protest the nomination of a new premier after 10 ministers resigned.
Violence ahead of presidential election between supporters of President Ange-Felix Patasse's MLPC and former president Andre Kolingba.
Yakoma gunmen sieze two towns after the loss of their presidential candidate.
Yakoma gunmen sieze two towns after the loss of their presidential candidate.
Mass transit workers want a hike in their fares to cover increased fuel prices
Militiamen demonstrate to be inducted into the army.  Presidential guard fires warning shots to disperse the crowd.  Arrests are made.
Militiamen demonstrate to be inducted into the army.  Presidential guard fires warning shots to disperse the crowd.  Arrests are made.
Nuns protest the killing of a colleague by highwaymen.
Football squad strikes because of unpaid pocket money.
Unknown assailants shoot and kill the Libyan ambassador.
Civil servants strike over overdue wages.  Several times other unions join the civil servants.
Youths protest against President Ange-Felix Patasse.
Strike over backpay.  10,000 govt. employees march through the street on 11/24/2000.
General strike over unpaid wages.
protesters demand President Ange-Felix Patasse step down.  Police repress with tear gas and arrest 75.
Municipal workers strike over back pay.
Gathering of religious worshippers organized by the president.  Supports govt. against striking civil servants.
Nomadic cattle herders from Chad called the Zaraguinas raid two villages in CAR.
Nomadic cattle herders from Chad called the Zaraguinas raid two villages in CAR.
Nomadic raiders attack a village of Chadian farmers, looting their goods.
Strike over overdue wages.
2001 Central African Republic Government
Taxi driver fails to stop at a checkpoint and is shot and killed.  Unions stage strike in protest.
Students protest over grant arrears and better conditions.  Police break up with tear gas.
Sudanese and CAR herdsmen clash in the CAR.  Location and date unknown.  Fighting starts after a rumor spreads that a Muslim tribal leader, relative to the CAR's president, was killed by a Sudanese.
Parliamentarians stage walkout over unpaid cash allowances.
Raiders attacked lands owned by villagers
Teachers strike over back pay.  Strike ends after 3/15/2003 coup (see below).
Civilians protest posting of Congolese militias in the capital.  Loyalist troops fire on the protesters, no one is killed.
Residents of Bangui stage massive strike to protest the looting and raping by foreign fighters propping up the govt.
A Libyan soldier is shot and killed by unknown assailants.
Residents of the capital take to the streets banging cooking pots to protest continuing rebellions and foreign troops.  Protest is stopped on day two after the sounds of gun fire are heard.
Govt. forces kill a rebel leader.
Students protest govt. failure to pay grants.  Police break up protest with tear gas and gun fire.  No one is killed.
Teachers protest unpaid wages.
After several years of rebellion by Francois Bozize, he and his followers manage to stage a coup and overthrow president Ange-Felix Patasse.  Looting continues for several days after the coup.
30,000 people march in the streets to show support for new president who took power in a coup on 3/15/2003.
May Day rally.  1000s show up to show support for labor.  New president attends and the crowd supports him.
Student protest erupts over delay in exam results, setting up roadblocks and burning tires.  Security forces shoot and kill one.
Civilians angry with the presence of govt. allied Chadian mercenaries clash with security forces.  4 die.
Professors stage month long strike over back pay.
Govt. calls for a national day of fasting and prayer.  The leader of a small party (Democratic Movement for the Renaissance and Evolution of Central Africa) protests by gorging himself on grilled bananas and peanuts.
Enthusiastic crowd greets the first lady of the CAR.  Bodyguards open fire, one dies.
Parliament office workers and aides block access to the parliament, protesting pay arrears.
Rally to support a public sector strike over back pay.  Strike details not given.
Students of Bangui University strike over unpaid grants.  On 3/2/2004 the students stage a demonstration that the police break up with tear gas.
Violent demonstration by students throwing stones at the vehicles of French troops.  Cause is unknown.
Student protest unpaid grants.  Students set fire to tires and throw stones.  Govt. arrests 12.
Teachers strike over back pay.
Insurgents once loyal to president Francois Bozize battle security forces, demanding pay and admission to the armed forces.  The ex-rebels clash with the govt. twice in 10 days.
Chandians barricade streets in Bangui to protest the death of a compatriot in police hands.  Police disperse with by firing shots in the air.
1000s of supports march in the streets to support President Francois Bozize.
All private newspapers in CAR suspend publication in protest of arrest of a newspaper man.
All private newspapers in CAR suspend publication in protest of arrest of a newspaper man.
Soldiers are attacked by unknown assailants, three die.
Strike over back pay.
Sudanese raiders attack Birao looking for fuel.
Civil servants strike over back pay, pensions and other benefits.
Bandits attack an army position.
Shootout between Republican Guard (govt.) forces and body guards attached to former president Andre Kolingba, an electoral rival to current preident Francois Bozize.  One injured.
Supporters of opposition candidate Nicolas Tiangaye riot when news leaks that their candidate is behind in presidential run off election.  Police use tear gas.
Article claims 4000 people have fled the CAR over an 8 day period because of attacks by unidentified armed groups.
Chadian rebels hired during the reign of CAR's former president attack a government vehicle.
Armed attack on the town of Markounda by forces unknown.
Strike reported retrospectively.  Most details are unknown.
Civil servants strike over back pay.
Violence eruptes at a funeral of a slain soldier.  Security forces open fire at a crowd of people.
Transport workers strike to protest rising fuel costs.
Govt. forces react to rebel attack near Paoua (more than 1000 people with rifles and machetes attack a police station) and kill indiscriminately, including many civilians.  Death toll is disputed.  Death toll eventually rises over 100.
Temp. teachers strike to protest vacation pay arrears.
Students protest to support teacher strike.  Police use tear gas and bullets.  No one is hurt.
3000 unionists, human rights activists, and others protest rising violence in the CAR, call for the govt. and rebels to work toward peace.
Chadian rebels attempting the overthrow of Chad's president attack government and AU forces in several days of fighting.
Lawyers stage week long strike to protest continuing detention of acquited coup plotters.
The president speaks to a crowd of 30,000 demonstrators and accuses Sudan of backing rebels in the CAR.
Press strike to protest politically motivated death threats against media executives.
2006 Central African Republic Government
Rebels attack Paoua.
Street vendors set up tables around a shop.  The shop owner asks the police to make them leave.  A riot ensues.  Police open fire, killing 1.
Police kill two that fail to stop at a checkpoint.  Several hundred people protest the police brutality the next day.  Police respond with brutality, opening fire.  7 are wounded.
French fighter jets strike rebel positions, kill 2.
Rebels accusing the president of misrule attack a town.
Bandits rob two UN vehicles.
Aid worker deliberately targeted by shots fired and killed.
Strike by civil servants.  Details are unknown.
Civil servants strike over back pay.  Strike causes the Prime Minister to resign.
About 300 armed men attack several villages along border with Sudan and DRC.  Kidnap 150, committ many rapes.
About 300 armed men attack several villages along border with Sudan and DRC.  Kidnap 150, committ many rapes.
About 300 armed men attack several villages along border with Sudan and DRC.  Kidnap 150, committ many rapes.
About 300 armed men attack several villages along border with Sudan and DRC.  Kidnap 150, committ many rapes.
Unknown gunmen kill an aid worker.
A rebel group ambushes government forces.
Unknown gunmen ambush an army patrol.
Ethnic groups clash.
Soldiers of the presidential guard beat the police commissioner to death.   Protesters riot in response, and the army disperses them with live rounds.
Bandits steal 170 oxen from farmers.  Two days later, three bandits and a cattle breeder are killed when a farmer's self-defence group launches an operation to recover stolen oxen.
Farmers and Traders clash over stolen oxen with guns, blades, and arrows.
A rebel group seizes and kills the leader of the national stockbreeders association.
The Vatican appoints a new archbishop for the CAR, and the local priests strike because they were not consulted.
Ethnic Kara attack the Goula, an ethnic group that has opted into the peace process.
Unknown gunmen kill a Red Cross aid worker.
2009 Central African Republic Government
LRA forces raid CAR towns.
LRA forces raid CAR towns.
LRA forces raid CAR towns.
LRA forces raid CAR towns.
Gunmen abduct two French aid workers from the group Triangle.
Ugandan soldiers kill a top official in the LRA.
LRA rebels attack villages, kidnapping several.
APRD rebels attack Chadian cattle herders, stealing cattle and killing several.
LRA rebels attack villages.
Teachers protest killings by members of a rebel group.
LRA rebels attack a Red Cross aid vehicle.
LRA rebels attack villagers, but self-defense units kill two rebels.
LRA rebels attack a village, kidnapping dozens.
LRA rebels attack a village, killing and kidnapping several.
Dissident rebels break a peace treaty and attack a village.
LRA rebels attack a village, killing several.
LRA rebels attack a village controlled by UFDR forces.
LRA rebels attack a village, kidnapping several girls.
Citizens protest and riot after a soldier killed a youth suspected of theft.
The LRA attacks a village, killing 6 and abducting dozens.
Riots erupt after the bodies of two children are discovered in a car belonging to a Muslim.  A crowd lynches a relative of the car's owner.  Youths then run riot.  They attack Muslims, and loot their shops and mosques.
Doctors march to demand protection against the Lord's Resistance Army.
University staff strike to demand pay awards and special bonuses.
Bus and taxi drivers went on strike for one day to protest the government's decision to raise fuel prices.
Ugandan troops encountered and engaged members of the LRA within Central Africa several times in early 2012, killing 7, capturing 1, and rescuing several hostages.
Rebel forces from Chad attacked and set fire to two small villages.
Rebel forces from Chad attacked and set fire to two small villages.
The LRA attacked and looted a plant operated by French nuclear power company Areva and the surrounding area. Military forces responded but recorded no casualties except on e villager from a nearby area.
Armed gunmen kidnapped two Chinese nationals working on a road project and opened fire on border guards, killing two. One of the attackers was later found dead some ways away.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
An alliance of anti-government rebel groups seized Ndele and attacked two other small towns,  pushing back Central African forces and causing civilians to flee. Non-splinter forces of the CPJP were also targeted.
Legislators led citizens in a peaceful protest of the violence occuring in northern Central Africa.
A peaceful protest of France's failure to help the Central African Republic government turned violent, as Protesters attacked the French Embassy and offices of Air France.
A young Muslim was questioned by members of a citizen militia and tried to escape and was shot dead by soldiers, setting off clashes in which a police officer was killed
Clashes erupted after residents saw rebels raiding a local sugar refinery and attacked the ambulance they were trying to use to cart off their loot the rebels fired on the residents
Ugandan troops killed the bodyguard of Joseph Kony in a firefight
2013 Central African Republic Diamond mining zones
2013 Central African Republic Diamond mining zones
Rebels destroyed police posts and a town hall, and looted a church of many items, including motorcycles of the Catholic charity Caritas and robbed people of their goods
Rebels destroyed police posts and a town hall, and looted a church of many items, including motorcycles of the Catholic charity Caritas and robbed people of their goods
Fighters of the Convention of Patriots for Peace and Justice attacked the local administrative headquarters, the army base, the paramilitary police post, the customs post and the police station
Seleka rebels attacked government forces
Fighters from the Seleka rebel group attacked the towns of Gambo and Bangassou, causing security forces to flee
Four soldiers were killed in a rebel attack
Rebels seized five ministers who joined the power-sharing government from rebel ranks because the government failed to implement promises from earlier peace agreements such as integrating rebel fighters into the army
Rebels seized several towns, shooting their way through the Damara checkpoint and an ariel attack against rebel positions killed a civilian and wounded 6 soldiers
Rebels seized several towns, shooting their way through the Damara checkpoint and an ariel attack against rebel positions killed a civilian and wounded 6 soldiers
Rebels seized several towns, shooting their way through the Damara checkpoint and an ariel attack against rebel positions killed a civilian and wounded 6 soldiers
Rebels seized several towns, shooting their way through the Damara checkpoint and an ariel attack against rebel positions killed a civilian and wounded 6 soldiers
Rebels seized several towns, shooting their way through the Damara checkpoint and an ariel attack against rebel positions killed a civilian and wounded 6 soldiers
A rebel tied the hands of a looter to his feet behind his back and dragged him on the ground and he was put into a pickup truck and flogged with bullet belts
Widespread looting of hospitals and aid facilities, shops and businesses occurred after the coup
Several media organisations' offices were raided by Seleka forces
About 2,000 people held a protest after Seleka rebels fatally shot a motorcyclist
Nearly 20 people were killed in fighting between rebels and residents as Seleka members were searching for weapons among residents
Nine men were abducted by Seleka forces and accused of being members of the national military and five were killed
Seven ex-rebels were killed by a mob
About 500 Seleka rebels protested to demand that rebel leader Djotodia pay them bonuses they say they were promised
Two former child soldiers were stoned to death by a mob after they reportedly stole a vehicle on the orders of a local rebel commander
Two people, a priest and a woman carrying her baby, were shot and killed by Seleka rebels
Armed fighters took a dozen civilians hostage and two people were killed
Rebel fighters stole 26 cattle and assaulted a herder
Armed men raided houses and looted them, leaving six people dead and wounding several others
Gunfire was exchanged between rebels and military police after rebels stole and hid several vehicles
Seleka rebels demonstrated outside the hotel where their leader is based because they were dissatisfied with their living conditions
At least 25 people were killed in attacks Poulissi and Bossangoa, and several other nearby villages
At least 25 people were killed in attacks Poulissi and Bossangoa, and several other nearby villages
At least 25 people were killed in attacks Poulissi and Bossangoa, and several other nearby villages
Seleka rebels attacked the town of Bouca, killing seven people and looting houses and burning down almost 20 homes
At least ten people, mostly children, were detained by the Democratic Front for the Central African People, who demanded a ransom for their release
Seleka fighters launched an attack on the Democratic Front for the Central African People, killing five
Lord's Resistance Army fighters attacked two villages in Bria, looting houses and initially killing 6 people and other clashes between villagers and rebels killed 10 others
Protesters set up burning tire barricades after a student believed to have been kidnapped by ex-rebels was found dead and clashes led to the deaths of between 2 and 6
A Protestant Youth Center and a bank were looted
Rebels invaded the village, separated the men from the women, and took the men to a nearby house and slaughtered them with machetes
At least 11 people were killed and 35 injured when former Seleka rebels tried to disarm supporters of ousted leader Francois Bozize and looting occurred after the killing
Road haulage drivers were on strike for a week to protest against extortion and violence committed by men of the Seleka rebel alliance
Houses were looted overnight and set on fire
The African stabilization mission and French troops evacuated more than 1,000 displaced people at the Bangui airport by using tear gas
Between 2,000-3,000 protesters demonstrated to call for peace
2013 Central African Republic Muslims
2013 Central African Republic Muslims
The village of Gaga was attacked by Bozize supporters, who were angry at the occupation of their land and extortion, and Seleka fighters retaliated, killing many
The vigilante Anti-Machete group clashed with government forces, and six members of the group were killed
Hundreds of vigilantes armed with firearms and machetes attacked the town of Bouar, with about 40 people being killed
People set up flaming tire barricades to protest the kidnapping of a soldier, and former Seleka rebels opened fire on the protesters, killing one and wounding several
A magistrate and his assistant were gunned down by ex-Seleka rebels, and three of the attackers were shot dead the next morning as they resisted arrest
Demonstrators protested the gunning down of a magistrate and his assistant by ex-rebels and ex-rebels opened fire on the protesters and killed two people
2013 Central African Republic Government
More than 1,000 women took part in a silent protest against violence towards women
Ugandan troops killed 13 members of the LRA
Christian militiamen had attacked Muslim herders and hacked 12 people to death
Seleka fighters attacked and looted the houses of Prime Minister Nicholas Tiangaye and President Michel Djotodia
Armed Christian fighters attacked Muslim armed fighters, and at between 100-300 people were killed
An armed pick-up opened fire three times in the direction of French troops who destroyed the vehicle, killing four Central African fighters and wounding six
Seleka rebel fighters attacked a hospital, pulling out at least nine wounded young men who were accused of being part of a Christian militia and killing them
Armed men exchanged gunfire with French troops
A mob stoned an ex-Seleka fighter to death and set his car on fire
A Christian man was attacked by Muslims who feared he was a member of a Christian militia
A mob of Christians attacked a suspected Seleka fighter
Two French troops were shot and killed in a firefight with 5-10 gunmen
Muslim-owned shops were looted
A mob of young men set fire to a mosque and used pick axes and other tools to try to tear down the walls of the mosque
Citizens killed three suspected ex-rebels after the men fire at civilians
Young men lobbed rocks trying to break into the compound of the Saint-Jacques Church, looking for an ex-rebel general and a mob hurled rocks at peacekeepers and their vehicles
27 Muslims were killed in an attack by Christian militants
Suspected rebels exchanged gunfire with French troops
A mob hacked a Muslim motorcyclist to death and cut off his hands, and another person was also wounded
Looters attacked a hospital
Armed men looted food supplies
A Chadian peacekeeper was killed in a grenade attack by Christian militants and several others were injured and the peacekeepers responded by opening fire
Christian militias armed with kalashnikovs and rocket-launchers killed five Muslims
Several hundred protesters demanded the departure of President Djotodia and several demonstrators stoned a lorry that was carrying Muslims passengers
A mob of young men wearing crucifixes attacked a mosque, pounding holes into its walls and stripping apart the corrugated iron roof
Muslims attacked a car full of French journalists, blaming France for only disarming Muslim militias
Several thousand Seleka rebel supporters protested against French troops conducting a disarmament operation and a similar protest was broken up with tear gas
French troops opened fire on a group of half-a-dozen people suspected of being ex-Seleka who were preparing to use their weapons
Several hundred Christian protesters demonstrated to call for the departure of President Djotodia and also to demand the departure of Chadian troops and clashed with Chadian troops who opened fire
Burundian peacekeepers disarmed Seleka rebels and Chadian peacekeepers threw a grenade and opened fire on them, wounding three Chadians
An African Union peacekeeper from the Republic of Congo was lacerated and hacked to death by a Christian militia
Dozens of Muslims marched to demand the departure of French troops
Chadian civilians attempting to flee the Central African Republic by car were attacked by a Christian militia, killing 3 Chadians and wounding 10 others
Chadian and Burundian peacekeepers came under fire from Christian vigilantes, with six killed
Armed assailants attempted to attack the presidential palace and the president's residence but the assailants were pushed back
Chadian troops threw grenades into a crowd of angry protesters, killing one and injuring several
Two peacekeepers were killed by unknown assailants after they were ambushed while on patrol
Hundreds looted the home and garage of a former Seleka rebel
Thousands of angry people flooded the runway of the international airport, shouting slogans against the nation's president
Christian Militias and Muslim former rebels engage in gun battles in Bangui.
An unidentified assailant threw a grenade into a crowded market injuring 4.
Thousands of demonstrators celebrate the resignation of President Michel Djotodia. Celebrations deteriorate into looting and sectarian violence including cannibalism.
Thousands of demonstrators celebrate the resignation of President Michel Djotodia. Celebrations deteriorate into looting and sectarian violence including cannibalism.
Continuing sectarian violence between Muslims and Christians leaves hundreds dead.
Continuing sectarian violence between Muslims and Christians leaves hundreds dead.
Continuing sectarian violence between Muslims and Christians leaves hundreds dead.
Continuing sectarian violence between Muslims and Christians leaves hundreds dead.
Continuing sectarian violence between Muslims and Christians leaves hundreds dead.
Thousands of demonstrators celebrate as Seleka rebels are escorted from the capital by peace keeping forces.
Sectarian violence between Muslims and Christians erupts in the town of Bambari and spreads to other cities. UN police monitoring a protest come under attack.
Sectarian violence between Muslims and Christians erupts in the town of Bambari and spreads to other cities. UN police monitoring a protest come under attack.
Dozens of Seleka rebels protest against government plans to relocate them back to their rural homes.
Hundreds of women march topless through town to protest sectarian violence.
Seleka rebels attack governmental officials in the North of the country.
Renewed sectarian violence in Bambari leaves at least 4 dead.
Renewed sectarian violence leaves dozens dead.
Renewed sectarian violence leaves dozens dead.
Renewed sectarian violence leaves dozens dead.
Renewed sectarian violence leaves dozens dead.
Two rival anti-balaka groups clash in Bambari killing six.
Unknown attackers, suspected Christian anti-balaka groups, have been attacking and kidnapping aid workers and government officials. Approximately 15 people have been kidnapped, many of whom have since been released. Reasons unknown. 
Eight people have been killed in the north of the country blamed on Muslim Peuls.
Muslim ex-Seleka rebels attacked a village killing 10 and burning down houses and plantations.
UN Peace Keeping forces evict guerillas from the mining town aiming to stop the parallel administration.
Violence broke out when the Muslim herders noticed some of their cattle had been stolen. In retaliation they ransacked villages.
MINUSCA mission base has been the site of two attacks in a week. UN Peackeepers shoot warning shots to push back protesters at the UN base when the demonstration turned violent when demonstrators tried to set fire to the base. One person was killed. 
Demonstrators call for the delay of elections over the lack of ability to mobilize funds to finance campaigns.
Unidentified armed men, some disguised at UN troops, attacked a radio station causing damage. No reported causalities. 
UN Peace keepers were attacked in the capital. One soldier was killed and eight wounded. 
Clashes between Christian and Muslims erupted in a rural village against a herdsmen's camp. 12 people were killed in the fighting. 
Clashes between Christian and Muslims erupted in a rural village against a herdsmen's camp. 12 people were killed in the fighting. 
A Rwandan Peace keeper attacks the MINUSCA mission base killing four colleagues. 
Sectarian clashes emerge after the beating and killing of a young Muslim boy by Christian anti-balaka militants. Approximately 20 are killed in the following clashes. Aid workers are attacked.
Violence erupted after a Muslim taxi driver was killed for unknown reasons. The sectarian violence in prolonged in the capital. 500 prisoners escaped a jail. Looting and killing is rampant. 
protesters gathered demanding the resignation of the interim president after the deaths of over 20 in the capital. Reports claim that Peace keepers fired into the crowds killing three. UN denies these claims. 
Unknown gunmen open fire on UN peace keepers killing one. 
Seleka rebels began an advance on the capital. UN peace keepers clash with the rebels after they ignore an ultimatum to halt their advance. 
Sectarian violence re-erupts in the capital. 
Seven UN police were ambushed by anti-balaka Christian militia and abducted. They were later released. 
Three unknown armed men opened fire on UN peace keepers. Peace keepers return fire, killing one. 
Religious violence re-erupts in the capital. 
Religious violence erupts in an internally displaced persons camp. One peace keeper is killed following the clash.
One Muslim mand was killed outside a mosque in the PK5 neighborhood, site of religious conflict. 
Christian anti-balaka attack and loot a commercial convoy. No reports of causalities. 
Ex-Seleka rebels attack a refugee camp. 13 were killed including 5 combatants, reasons for the attack are unknown. 
Muslim combatants attack a displaced persons camp   killing eight. 
protesters gather following the announcement of the approved candidates for the upcoming elections. The protest quickly turn violent.
Violence erupts between opponents and supporter of the upcoming referendum. Opponents blocked supporters from voting.
protesters gather outside headquarters deeming the expulsion of Muslim militants in the Muslim area in the city that have declared an "autonomous state". 
1989 Chad Government
Human rights group holds first-ever protest march, protesting government abuses and murders
Students strike, protesting living conditions and demanding grant payments
Teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Human rights group boycotts Superior Transitional Council, protesting violence in Chad
Demonstrators march, protesting rebel massacre that killed over 80
Two villages clash, vying for control of an island on Lake Chad
1997 Chad Government
Students strike, demanding late payment of grants
Citizens protest oil groups Elf and Shell backing out of pipeline construction
Students strike, demanding higher grants and better facilities
Warring tribes clash over waterhole
Two ethnic groups battle over the control of a well.  Army forces intervene.
Police detain opposition candidates and beat supporters gathered outside their houses
Refugees occupy church, attempting to draw attention to their plight
Defense attorneys boycott trial of journalists accused of libelling top civil servant
Students protest Iraq war and are dispersed by police
Rebels attack and capture airport, killing 35 government troops
Ethnic rebels splinter from the main rebel group over a peace agreement and attack government forces.
Workers strike, protesting planned decreases in benefits
Sudanese rebels attack Chadian border town, killing one
Sudanese rebels raid Chadian border town, resulting in battle between Chadian soldiers
Opposition politicians and supporters strike on day of vote that removed restrictions on presidential term limits
Chadian army and Arab Janjaweed from Sudan battle.
Refugees protest living conditions and neglect by UNHCR and eventually attack aid workers
Refugees protest living conditions and neglect by UNHCR and eventually attack aid workers
Citizens engage in intercommunal violence, rioting and burning hundreds of houses
Unknown men attack Chadian villages
Chadian citizens clash with Sudanese refugees as UN aid elevates living conditions above their own
Largest trade union strikes, demanding unpaid wages
Janjaweed militia attack Chadian village and refugee camp, killing 104
2005 Chad Government
Sudanese Janjaweed raiders attack an army position.  Dozens are killed.
Gunmen attack aid workers while food is being distributed.  They steal food and communications equipment.
Citizens rally in support of President after rebel attack on capital
Civil servants strike, demanding unpaid wages
Sudanese refugees protest Sudan's alleged support of Chadian rebels
Arab Janjaweed from Sudan attack two villages and steal 1000 head of cattle.
Arab Janjaweed from Sudan attack two villages and steal 1000 head of cattle.
Journalist goes on hunger strike, demanding access to a lawyer
Opposition supporters boycott election, protesting lack of transparency
Civil servants strike, demanding unpaid wages
Oil workers strike, protesting higher wages of Cameroonian workers
Oil workers strike, protesting higher wages of Cameroonian workers
Arab Janjaweed from Sudan attack a dozen villages in eastern Chad.
Tensions from Sudanese civil war results in clashes between villagers
Private media workers announce they will not publish newspapers to protest restrictions involved with 'state of emergency' declaration
Private radio stations protest government censorship during state of emergency
Wounded soldiers demonstrate for money and medical attention
Chadian nomads attack Sudanese refugees
Arab Janjaweed raid two towns of ethnic African Dadjo after two Arabs are killed.
Arab Janjaweed raid two towns of ethnic African Dadjo after two Arabs are killed.
Two groups clash, as a result of a Tama being appointed in the government
Two rival ethnic groups clash, killing 20
Citizens protest French charity's planned movement of Chadian children to France
Chadian men protest outside courthouse where aid workers' trials being held
Unidentified men shoot and rob aid workers.  A firefight erupts when local police intervene.
Detained French aid workers accused of kidnapping children go on hunger strike, declaring their innocence
Citizens protest return of convicted aid workers to France
Private media workers strike, protesting state of emergency restrictions
Students clash with police after fellow pupil arrested
Aid workers strike, protesting killing of French aid worker
A tax official shoots the interior minister.
Chadian President leads government-sponsored march against what he claims were Sudanese-backed rebels
Armed gunmen snatch Red Cross member outside of Darfur region
Armed gunmen kidnap a British aid worker.
Armed gunmen kidnap a Chinese engineer working on a water supply project.
The president's election opponents address a rally of about 1000 people, urging them to boycott the vote.
Chad's largest labor union called a three-day strike to force the government to honor its promise of a pay raise.
2012 Chad Government
Trade unions and oil workers organize a strike protesting poor working conditions and demanding better pay.
Lawyers strike for overdue pay and better working conditions.
Tens of thousands of people marched in the capital to denounce Boko Haram and support government's decision to send troops to fight the islamists.
The pre-dawn attack left four civilians and one soldier dead and most of the village torched before the militants were pushed back. Two militants were killed.
Boko Haram ambushed civilians on their way to a local market, killing 7 people. 
Boko Haram attacked Choua, a Lake Chad island on Chadian territory. The army repelled the attack. 4 soldiers and 33 militants were killed.
Suicide bombings in the capital, which targeted two police buildings, killed 35 people and injured 100. Boko Haram claimed the responsibility for the attack.
Police raided a terrorist cell, arresting 60 people and seizing communication materials. 
Five police officers and six Boko Haram members were killed when  Boko Haram militants blew themselves up during a police raid on a safe house in the capital.
15 people, including one police officer, were killed by a suicide bomber stopped for a security screening near a market entrance. Boko Haram claimed the responsibility for the attack.
Troops raided Lake Chad islands engaging in heavy fighting with Boko Haram, as militants fled, kidnapping women and children. At least 117 militants and 2 soldiers were killed. 
Troops raided Lake Chad islands engaging in heavy fighting with Boko Haram, as militants fled, kidnapping women and children. At least 117 militants and 2 soldiers were killed. 
10 alleged members of Boko Haram were executed by firing squad, a day after they were found guilty of a double suicide killing in the capital on June 15.
11 soldiers and 17 Boko Haram members were killed in a Boko Haram attack on Kaiga Ngouboua.
41 people were killed in a triple suicide attack in Baga Sola. 
Soldiers repelled two attacks by Boko Haram on army posts around Lake Chad, leaving 30 militants, 3 soldiers, and 11 civilians dead.
Soldiers repelled two attacks by Boko Haram on army posts around Lake Chad, leaving 30 militants, 3 soldiers, and 11 civilians dead.
Soldiers repelled two attacks by Boko Haram on army posts around Lake Chad, leaving 30 militants, 3 soldiers, and 11 civilians dead.
Soldiers repelled two attacks by Boko Haram on army posts around Lake Chad, leaving 30 militants, 3 soldiers, and 11 civilians dead.
A twin suicide bombing killed 3 civilians and injured 11 in Ngouboua village.
A triple suicide bombing killed at least 27 people and wounded over 80  in Loulou Fou.
University graduates march to demand civil service jobs.
Interior ministry civil servants strike over the nomination of mayors and district administrators on political grounds instead of qualifications.
University students protest demanding the government pay owed grants.
Supporters of the former finance minister, Lekoundz Itihi Ossetoumba, gather at his trial to denounce investigations of corruption being carried out by the transitional government.
Bank and insurance workers strike demanding wage increases.
Soldiers protest demanding the interim government reinstate military leaders.
Milongo supporters march in support of the transition government and against military attempts against the government.
Students protest after the death of a fellow student in a car accident thought to be caused by a taxi driver.
University students protest demanding the government pay owed grants.
Milongo supporters protest when Bernard Kolelas announced his candidacy for presidency.
Finance ministry staff strike demanding 25% pay raise.
Opposition supporters demonstrate against President Lissouba's decision to dissolve the national assembly.
Opposition party members protest and demonstrate after disputed legislative elections.
1993 Republic of Congo Government
University students protest demanding the government pay owed grants.
University students protest demanding the government pay owed grants.
General strike called but not observed by most, demanding salary increases and payment of wage arrears.
Oil workers strike demanding pay increases and housing bonuses.
Civil servants strike demanding payment of wage arrears.
Public service employees strike halting telecommunications, fuel distribution, electricity and water supplies.
Men recruited into military training take over their training camp demanding entry into the military as sergeants.
Non-commissioned officers take hold of defense ministry demanding changes to defense legislation.
Supporters of the new Kabila regime protest outside the Zairian embassy.
1997 Republic of Congo Government
Former Cobra militia members riot over being refused positions within the government security forces.
Municipal workers strike demanding seven months of past due wages.
University students strike over unpaid grants and study conditions.
2002 Republic of Congo Government
Young voters store ballot centers protesting alleged fraud and being turned away for not having national identity cards.
Ninja militia members attack a freight train carrying oil and industrial products.
Dispute between Ninja and Nsiloulous militia members over food sharing and financial resources.
National School of Civil Service students and freelance journalists stage protests demanding entrance into the civil service.
Teachers strike over pay and working conditions.
Sporadic gunfire heard after a dispute between Ninja militia members and police.  Escalated to fighting between the two groups by the end of the week.
Fighting broke out between former rebels and soldiers when the former rebels entered the city to provide protection for their leader.
Former rebels stopped a train and robbed passengers in protest to the failure of their leader to take his post as peace minister.
Protesters rioted at the burial service of former minister Jean-Pierre Thystere Tchicaya because they believed he had been possessed.
Mourners frustrated over government compensation for burial clothes hurled stones and engaged in fights after arms depot explosion that killed over 100.
Opposition supporters stormed elections office demanding publication of results, threw stones at soldiers. Soldiers fired shots in air, 3 wounded by stray bullet. 2 wounded when struck by car of ruling party candidate, son-in-law of president.
Government troops attempted to arrest Colonel Marcel Tsourou in connection with an accidental explosion that killed hundreds in March. Tsourou resisted arrest
Police in Pointe-Noire arrested over 600 immigrants over the course of two days as the second phase of an operation to expel illegal immigrants, particularly those from the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Several thousand gathered in Brazzaville to protest the planned referendum that could allow for President Nguesso to serve a third term.
Tens of thousands of supporters of President Nguesso rallied in Brazzaville to show their support of the president, who has proposed a referendum to extend term limits.
Six to thirteen people were injured in clashes between police and protesters who gathered to oppose the proposed referendum that would allow President Nguesso to serve a third term.
After a ban on demonstrations was announced, protesters took to the streets to oppose an upcoming referendum that would extend President Nguesso's term limits; three police stations were burned; three people were killed in Brazzaville, and one was killed in Pointe-Noire. 
After a ban on demonstrations was announced, protesters took to the streets to oppose an upcoming referendum that would extend President Nguesso's term limits; three police stations were burned; three people were killed in Brazzaville, and one was killed in Pointe-Noire. 
After a ban on demonstrations was announced, protesters took to the streets to oppose an upcoming referendum that would extend President Nguesso's term limits; three police stations were burned; three people were killed in Brazzaville, and one was killed in Pointe-Noire. 
Supporters of opposition parties across the country boycotted the referendum to decide on a third presidential term for Nguesso.
An unauthorized demonstration organized by an opposition party occurs.  The police open fire, killing 2.
Government troops storm a university and kill between 50 and 150 students.  The government claims the soldiers were there to quell violence between students, although the campus is the scene of anti-Mobuto oppositionism.
Government employees strike over pay.
Protesters demonstrate against the rising prices of basic foods.  The demonstration degenerates into a riot in which several die due to government shootings.
Daily protests by students in favor of democracy.
Protesters run riot, smashing windows and looting shops to protest against get-rich-quick ponzi schemes promoted on government radio and TV.
A pro-democracy protest ends when government soldiers use tear gas, water cannons, and truncheons.  Some accuse the soldiers of opening fire, wounding at least 200 people.
Government forces fire on pro-democracy protesters, killing 16.
Teachers strike, keeping schools closed for most of the school year.
Protesters riot to protest against inflation and demand democratic reforms.  Police fire on the crowds, killing 3.  Similar riots occur in other towns, but their names are not known.
Government employees strike to demand pay increases to cope with inflation.
Pro-government militants and military forces attack the headquarters of an opposition party, killing 2.
3000 paratroopers mutiny because they haven't been paid in several months.  They enter the capital and begin looting.  Violent riots and marches spread out from the capital.
3000 paratroopers mutiny because they haven't been paid in several months.  They enter the capital and begin looting.  Violent riots and marches spread out from the capital.
3000 paratroopers mutiny because they haven't been paid in several months.  They enter the capital and begin looting.  Violent riots and marches spread out from the capital.
3000 paratroopers mutiny because they haven't been paid in several months.  They enter the capital and begin looting.  Violent riots and marches spread out from the capital.
3000 paratroopers mutiny because they haven't been paid in several months.  They enter the capital and begin looting.  Violent riots and marches spread out from the capital.
Doctors at Kinshasa's largest hospital strike after government soldiers enforcing a curfew loot the home of one of their colleagues.
About 20 opponents of the Mobutu regime force their way into his marble palace and disrupt democracy talks.  They claim they will kill an opposition leader if he agrees to become Mobutu's prime minister.
Doctors strike to demand higher wages and the resumption of a national conference on democracy.  Nurses and other medical personnel join them in January 1992.
Supporters of an opposition politician burn the homes of Mobutu supporters and clash with troops.  Troops use tear gas and bullets to crush the demonstrators.  At least one person dies.
Mobutu fires the new prime minister.  When news breaks, thousands of anti-Mobutu activists take to the streets of Kinshasa and riot.  Several groups of anti-Mobutu protesters gather outside the French and Belgian embassies
Mobutu fires the new prime minister.  When news breaks, thousands of anti-Mobutu activists take to the streets of Kinshasa and riot.  Several groups of anti-Mobutu protesters gather outside the French and Belgian embassies
Mobutu fires the new prime minister.  When news breaks, thousands of anti-Mobutu activists take to the streets of Kinshasa and riot.  Several groups of anti-Mobutu protesters gather outside the French and Belgian embassies
Mobutu fires the new prime minister.  When news breaks, thousands of anti-Mobutu activists take to the streets of Kinshasa and riot.  Several groups of anti-Mobutu protesters gather outside the French and Belgian embassies
Mobutu fires the new prime minister.  When news breaks, thousands of anti-Mobutu activists take to the streets of Kinshasa and riot.  Several groups of anti-Mobutu protesters gather outside the French and Belgian embassies
Mobutu fires the new prime minister.  When news breaks, thousands of anti-Mobutu activists take to the streets of Kinshasa and riot.  Several groups of anti-Mobutu protesters gather outside the French and Belgian embassies
Mobutu fires the new prime minister.  When news breaks, thousands of anti-Mobutu activists take to the streets of Kinshasa and riot.  Several groups of anti-Mobutu protesters gather outside the French and Belgian embassies
Mobutu fires the new prime minister.  When news breaks, thousands of anti-Mobutu activists take to the streets of Kinshasa and riot.  Several groups of anti-Mobutu protesters gather outside the French and Belgian embassies
Mobutu fires the new prime minister.  When news breaks, thousands of anti-Mobutu activists take to the streets of Kinshasa and riot.  Several groups of anti-Mobutu protesters gather outside the French and Belgian embassies
Armed attackers invade the home of Monsignor Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya.
Zambia begins a crackdown on illegal Zairian immigrants.  Fearing that the same will happen to them, illegal Zambians in Zaire riot outside the Zambian embassy.
Port workers strike to demand democratic reforms.  The strikers dismantle part of the road connecting Matadi to Kinshasa, triggering a food crisis in the capital.
Sporadic protests occur outside the Bank of Zaire and the ministries of foreign affairs and justice as a result of a food shortage caused by an ongoing strike in Matadi.
A Christian church led march demands democratization and the re-opening of a democracy conference.  Soldiers open fire.  Deaths include a member of the elite Civil Guard.
Soldier led looting and violence in Kamina.
Soldiers rampage in eastern Zaire.  Thousands of refugees flee into Uganda.  At least 2 die when Ugandans cross the border to assist.
Thousands of people pour into the streets to protest in favor of democracy after Mobutu names Etienne Tshisekedi as prime minister.
Ethnic riots lead to 8 deaths.  The riots occur after Etienne Tshisekedi is elected prime minister over regional native Nguz Karl-i-Bond, who said after his defeat that the province would go into opposition.
Ethnic riots between Katangas and Kasais (Balubas).  Violence connected to the election of Etienne Tshisekedi, a Baluba, as prime minister over Katanga/Shaba native Nguzo Karl-i-Bond.
Protesters demonstrate against the issuance of five million Zaire banknote that the government has already demonetized.
Protesters riot, calling for the ouster of Mobutu.  Military forces fire into the crowd, killing 5.
Soldiers riot and loot in Goma to protest over back pay.
The Holy Alliance, a grouping of opposition parties, launches a general strike to protest the Mobutu dictatorship.
Riots and factional fighting.  Soldiers riot, loot, and clash with troops loyal to Mobutu.  They are angry that they are being paid in 5 million Zaire bank notes printed to keep up with hyperinflation.  Stray gunfire kills the French ambassador
Government soldiers fire a rocket into the home of an opposition leader's son, killing him.
Some 52 unarmed civilians are reportedly shot dead by Mobutu's elite guard.
Troops from Mobutu's special presidential guard back by tanks surround the National Assembly to demand that bank notes issued by Mobutu are accepted as legal currency.  They later surround the home of the interim prime minister.
Ethnic clashes.  Deaths are estimated.  Thousands die in ethnic clashes between Katangas and Balubas arising from Katangan support for an ousted prime minister and Baluba support for another.  A continuation of clashes in 1992.
Ethnic clashes over land and national rights.  Members of the Nyanga and Hunde tribes indigenous to Zaire attack Hutus and Tutsis from Rwanda.
Ethnic clashes over land and national rights.  Members of the Nyanga and Hunde tribes indigenous to Zaire attack Hutus and Tutsis from Rwanda.
Soldiers attack a rally for an opposition political party.  4 are killed.
Hundreds of soldiers riot and loot.  Further details unknown.
Soldiers explode a grenade in an open air market, killing 3.
Rebels fighting to overthrow the government stage an attack.
Rwandan refugees stampede as they flee from Tutsi rebels into Zaire.  Up to 50 die.
Two soldiers are killed by outraged refugees frustrated by robbery.
A Zairian paratrooper kills a moneychanger, triggering riots in protest.
Riots occur in refugee camps over food delivery and thefts by machete wielding gangs.
Riots occur in refugee camps over food delivery and thefts by machete wielding gangs.
Ethnic violence, thuggery, and terror attacks occur throughout Goma and several Rwandan refugee camps.  Gangs attack each other, and roving bands of Zairian soldiers rob refugees.
Ethnic violence, thuggery, and terror attacks occur throughout Goma and several Rwandan refugee camps.  Gangs attack each other, and roving bands of Zairian soldiers rob refugees.
Ethnic violence, thuggery, and terror attacks occur throughout Goma and several Rwandan refugee camps.  Gangs attack each other, and roving bands of Zairian soldiers rob refugees.
Hutu refugees attack each other, alleging collusion with the Rwandan Patriotic Front.  Several incidents occur.
Hutu refugees attack each other, alleging collusion with the Rwandan Patriotic Front.  Several incidents occur.
Zairian soldiers try to steal a Rwandan owned car.  Infuriated refugees clash with the soldiers, who call in reinforcements that fire on the crowd.  The next day, a crowd of refugees assaults a Reuters TV crew.
Rwandan refugees steal 50 Zairian cows and flee across the border.  Cattle owners and butchers seek the help of thugs and for several hours stage riots in Goma and blockade the Mugunga refugee camp.
A group of 6 Hutu militants accuse a fellow ethnic of being a spy for the Tutsis and invade an aid agency to kill him.
An unknown assailant sets off a grenade, killing 5 refugees.  The refugees then riot.
Violent demonstrations and riots in Goma over robberies by Zairian soldiers.  Civilian mobs carjack aid workers.  The violence causes Japan to withdraw its peacekeepers in the area.
Factional violence erupts in a refugee camp.  Hundreds of bandits believed to be Hutu militias take over the camp, forcing aid workers to flee.
Militant and mob violence in the refugee camps leads to 6 deaths.  Three foreign doctors are also killed.
Native Zairians and Hutus clash over ethnic issues and cattle.
Rioting refugees clash with Zairian troops, triggering a battle in which 15 die.  During the violence, a British member of Action-Aid is kidnapped.
A strike called by opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi turns Kinshasa into a ghost town.
Civil servants strike over back wages.
Refugees stone aid workers to protest a reduction in food rations.
Tutsi militias from Rwanda retaliate for cross-border raids by Hutus.  They cross Lake Kivu from Rwanda and attack refugees on Iwinja island.  They then go ashore on the Zairian side of the lake and attack a refugee camp.
Unknown attackers ambush an aid convoy.
Disputes over land, cattle, and ethnic issues cause a clash between native Zairians and Banayrwanda, ethnic groups from Rwanda.  Banayrwanda stage a massacre of native Zairians.
Disputes over land, cattle, and ethnic issues cause a clash between native Zairians and Banayrwanda, ethnic groups from Rwanda.  Banayrwanda stage a massacre of native Zairians.
A series of protests erupts after the interim parliament announces that the first general elections in a decade would be postponed for another two years.
12 people die in a opposition group demonstration.
Men in military uniform rob and kill 4 Italian aid workers with Mondo Giusto plus two children.
A bomb targeting the chief of the Zairian army explodes prematurely onboard a plane.  No one is hurt.
Unknown attack over unknown reasons in a largely unknown location.
Factional violence erupts near refugee camps.  Local Hunde tribesmen attack Hutus, Hutus attack Tutsis, and Zairian soldiers fight everyone, looting and robbing as they go.
A lieutenant colonel in a special army unit dies when he tries to disarm a drunken soldier with a grenade.  The deaths trigger rioting between two army units that leave at least 50 dead, mostly civilians.
Hutu rebels attack Rwandan soldiers in a national park.
Armed Hutus with rifles and machetes hunt down hundreds of Tutsis who had hidden in a Zairian church, killing at least 12.
Unknown gunmen ambush a military convoy, killing 7.
Angry Zairian soldiers blockade the airport to demand that troops wounded by unknown gunmen be transferred by plane to Kinshasa.
Hostile elements cross the border from Uganda, killing 30 villagers.
Unknown gunmen attack a Red Cross warehouse.
Tens of thousands of people march to protest in favor of democratization.
Zairian soldiers clash with Banyamulenge.  Deaths and numbers are unknown.
Marauders attack a Swedish missionary hospital and a Catholic missionary station, killing 40 people and committing many atrocities.  The attackers are believed to be Tutsis angry that the hospitals were treating Hutus.
Unknown attackers kill three civilians.
Armed men raid Bambu, killing between 50 and 60 civilians.  The violence is ethnic in nature, although the factions are not reported.
Tutsi militia attack Hutu refugees.
1996 Democratic Republic of the Congo Government
Students protest and riot, demanding that the prime minister step down.  They also protest outside the Burundi embassy to protest against the Tutsi-controlled government there.
More than 10,000 students storm through the capital in stolen vehicles to demand the resignation of the prime minister.  They condemn and attack foreign journalists, accusing them of being Rwandans.  Government forces shoot dead three students.
Carrying the coffin of a slain student over their heads, rioting students storm Parliament to demand the resignation of the prime minister, accused of allowing rebels to take over eastern Zaire.  Protests continue the next day.
Students call for a mass business boycott to rally against the government.  Shop owners and public transport workers strike.  Students line the road to the airport, blocking passage.  Soldiers use tear gas when rioters throw rocks at an EU dele
About 5000 protesters take to the streets demanding that Etienne Tshisekedi be returned to the prime minister's office.  Police use clubs.
Unknown men attack Bukavu.
Dozens of journalists employed by state run TV and radio surround the French embassy to demand that France not pursue charges against Zaire's ambassador to that country.
Protesters gather outside the home of Etienne Tshisekedi, the main opposition leader, to demand that Mobutu resign.  They also cheer for the rebel leader Laurent Kabila.
Protesters gather to demand that Mobutu resign.  Government forces arrest and beat the leader of the Union for Democracy and Social Progress.
About 200 protesters demonstrate outside the US embassy, blaming it for the civil war.
Pro-Tshisekedi supporters riot outside of parliament as it discusses ousting him as prime minister.  Police break up the riot with tear gas and clubs.
Thousands of protesters try to push past a line of police to carry Etienne Tshisekedi into the prime minister's office.
General strike called in opposition to Mobutu in Kinshasa and the five provinces that remain under government control.  Several marches and protests occur, and soldiers fire on them, but no one is hurt.
Rwandan refugees kill seven villagers.
Local Zairians hurl stones at UN vehicles and loot a WFP depot to protest the killing of Zairian villagers by Rwandan refugees.
Several hundred students and supporters of an opposition political party demonstrate against Laurent Kabila in the first such protest in the capital.
Hotel staff strike because rebels have not paid their bills in a rebel controlled city.
A citywide general strike is called by the opposition to protest against the issuance of a 100,000 Zaire bank note and to demand that Mobutu resign.
The immigration service strikes over back pay, stopping traffic on the river between Kinshasa and Brazzaville.
Violence erupts after the government falls and rebels enter the capital.  Widespread looting.  Civilians take revenge on former regime soldiers.  Most of the dead are civilians caught in the cross-fire.
Troops from the rebel army (now considered to be the government actor after the fall of Mobutu) shoot and kill a Hutu student.
Professors fearing pay cuts strike after the new government reduced tuition at the University of Lumumbashi.
Hutu protesters demonstrate against the killing of a student the day before.
Various religious and professional groups demonstrate with more the 10,000 people in support of the self-proclaimed president, Laurent Kabila.
Anti-government protest.  Kabila's troops disperse the demonstration.
Anti-government protest after 10 people are killed during a night of violence and kidnappings.  Kabila's troops fire on the demonstrators, killing dozens.
About 2000 people protest against the new president, Laurent Kabila.  Government (ex-rebel) troops beat the protesters.
Unknown men attack a group of Rwandan children and a civilian aid worker.
Several hundred protesters march against the new government.
Anti-government protest.  Kabila's troops disperse the demonstration.
Opposition parties protest against the new government, demanding that unbanning of political activity.  The police use tear gas and violently beat several people.  Seven people are clubbed to death.
Students demonstrate against the death of a fellow student shot dead by the military.
Anti-government protest.  50 youth wing members of an opposition political party are subsequently arrested and tortured.
Thousands of Laurent Kabila's supporters protest Western demands for an investigation into the massacre of refugees during the war by the rebels now controlling the government.
50 soldiers riot to protest the government's failure to pay their wages.
A gun battle occurs between rival groups of soldiers loyal to Laurent Kabila.
Former Zairean army soldiers attack Bukavu.
Rebels attack a Ugandan refugee camp.
Demonstration in front of the French embassy to protest again France's position toward DRC and its alleged involvement with the rebels.
Mai Mai and Hutus attack the Tutsi rebels controlling Goma.
Women protest in rebel-held Goma, demanding that the government negotiate with the rebels.
Mai Mai attack rebels controlling Bukavu.
Ethnic war between Hema and Lendu leads to 5000 deaths.  Ugandan troops are accused of siding with the Hema.
Ethnic groups battle over land rights.  370 killed when Wahema pastoralists are killed by Balendu farmers.
Street protests erupt when Catholic Archbishop Emmanuel Kataliko is expelled from the city by the rebels.
Inhabitants stage a series of protests over the fact that Rwandan soldiers are present in Bukavu supporting rebels.
A general strike in rebel-held Goma over unknown causes.
Hutu militias kill dozens in and around Goma throughout July.
A gunfight erupts around the house of opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi.
News of the death of Catholic Archbishop Emmanuel Kataliko sparks riots in Bukavu.
A demonstration occurs outside the home of a local government official named president of the Rwandan backed wing of the Congolese Rally for Democracy.  Rwandan soldiers backing the rebels open fire on the demonstrators, killing 20.
Lendu armed with spears and guns attack a Hema village, killing an unknown number and creating some 5000 refugees who flee into Uganda.
President Laurent Kabila is shot dead by a bodyguard in the presence of generals he angered by sacking.
The military abducts and kills 11 Lebanese migrant workers because they are suspected of being involved in Kabila's assassination.
Lendu and Ngiti attack Bunia to destroy a Ugandan helicopter that has been used against them.  The Ugandans drive back the attack, and then the Lendu and Ngiti militia attack Hema families, killing at least 50.
Tens of thousands of people march in favor of new president Joseph Kabila.
Gunmen ambush and kill 6 Red Cross workers.  The gunmen are later accused of belonging to the Ugandan army.
Rival fans invade a soccer match, triggering a riot and a stampede.
Students demonstrate to call on the rebels in charge of Goma to accept a government offer to pay salary arrears to civil servants.  Rebel troops fire into the crowd, killing 1.
Ngiti tribesmen ambush Ugandan soldiers they believe murdered a member of the tribe.
Civil servants strike to protest the rebels' decision to requisition money earned by utilities and other state organizations.
Ethnic clashes between Lendu and Hemas begins a process of ethnic mobilization that will result in open war between the two in May.
Mai Mai and rebels clash.
Lendu raiders attack Hema civilians, resulting in 100 deaths, including Ugandan soldiers.
A Banyamulenge leader mutinies against the rebel RCD, triggering a number of battles.  20 rebels and four Rwandan soldiers are killed.
Unknown attackers ambush a bus.
Rwandan back RCD rebels take Moliro in violation of a ceasefire.
Four gunmen throw a grenade into a church congregation, killing 2.
Fighting between the government forces allied with Hutu rebels and those of the rebel RCD.
Students protest for peace in rebel held Bukavu.  Rebel military forces disperse the protesters with some instances of brutality.
The main opposition party stages protests to demand a solution to the civil war.
The main opposition party stages protests to demand a solution to the civil war.
Mai Mai attack rebels transporting goods on a boat.
Rebel groups clash.  RCD-N is a splinter of RCD, MLC is a Ugandan backed group, and RCD/ML-Kisangani is a faction of the RCD.
A government minister is abducted by Hema militia.
Ethnic war driven by disputes over land claim 1400 lives.
Rebel troops mutiny, setting off a gun battle.  Rebels and civilian mobs riot and take over a radio station, lynching several people.  The RCD then carries out reprisals for the mutiny, summarily executing many people.
The RCD-ML, a Ugandan backed rebel group, and the government attack a group of villages and a large number of deaths result.
The RCD-ML, a Ugandan backed rebel group, and the government attack a group of villages and a large number of deaths result.
The RCD-ML, a Ugandan backed rebel group, and the government attack a group of villages and a large number of deaths result.
The RCD-ML, a Ugandan backed rebel group, and the government attack a group of villages and a large number of deaths result.
The RCD-ML, a Ugandan backed rebel group, and the government attack a group of villages and a large number of deaths result.
The RCD-ML, a Ugandan backed rebel group, and the government attack a group of villages and a large number of deaths result.
The RCD-ML, a Ugandan backed rebel group, and the government attack a group of villages and a large number of deaths result.
Rebels attack a UN peacekeeper base.
An ethnic Banyamulenge commander revolts against the RCD, triggering several weeks of fighting that involve Rwandan troops.
Mai Mais and a mutinous rebel force take a town from the Rwandan backed RCD.
Hutus attack a town.
Ugandan backed rebels and their Lendu allies battle against a rebel splinter group and ethnic Hemas.
A man attempts to rob a teacher.  In the ensuing clash, a student is wounded in the leg.  The next day, students take to the streets in protest.  UN troops are caught up in the protest, and they fire into the air to try to disperse the crowd.
Rebels clash with Mai Mai and Hutu militias.  The Mai Mais take Uvira.  Looting breaks out in the city.
Military forces of the 93rd Brigade made up of the Sharks and Chameleons battalions under a commander Emile sack, pillage, set fires, and fire rockets and flame throwers in Ankoro, killing dozens.
The RCD retakes Uvira from their ethnic rivals.
Mai Mai militia attack and rob members of the UN mission in the DRC (MONUC).
Rebel groups clash.
Mai Mai and rebels clash.
Unknown men attack a Red Cross vehicle.
Army forces and allied militia clash with the UPC and Ugandan backed forces.
Army forces and allied militia clash with the UPC and Ugandan backed forces.
Lendus militias stage several massacres of Hemas over the course of three hours.
A local militia attacks the rebel RCD to protest the arrest of their leader.
Lendu militia ambush Hema civilians.
Ethnic warfare.  Hema and Lendu militias clash after the withdrawal of Ugandan forces from Bunia.  Repeated massacres and battles.  The Hema and an allied rebel group, the Union of Congolese Patriots, take over Bunia.
A mob demanding a more robust protection of civilians attacks a peacekeeper post.
FNI militia kills 2 UN observers.
An attempted coup in a rebel group.  A mutiny leader, Ngoyi, rebels against a Commander Jerome.
Lendu militias massacre Hema refugees as they flee toward Uganda.
Rwandan backed RCD battles the Ugandan backed RCD-ML.
Renewed ethnic clashes between Hemas and Lendus.
RCD rebels capture a town from a splinter group.
Lendu militia ambush Hema civilians.
RCD rebels capture a town from a splinter group.
Government forces battle Uganda-backed Hema rebels.
A Hema militia and Lendu fighters battle, resulting in 7 deaths.
Ethnic riots result in five deaths.
Ethnic violence kills 60 civilians in the first two weeks of August.
Lendus attack a Hema village, resulting in 10 deaths.
Ethnic Lendu militia kill 60 people in a raid.
Gunmen attack two minibuses and loot them.
Three Lendu men kill a Hema man.
Lendu militias massacre Hemas.
Two Hema militias battle each other.
Magistrates strike over pay issues.
Students protest against fee increases and clash with police.  Two die.
University staff march on the budget ministry to complain about not being paid.  They clash with police, who shoot one lecturer dead.
Adja, a dissident wing of the Nationalist Integrationist Front (FNI), massacres civilians.  The FNI is a Lendu militia.
UN peacekeepers arrest 13 armed militiamen after a raid.
UN troops and UPC troops battle, and the UN destroys a UPC camp.
UN troops battle with the UPC.
UN forces battle against the UPC.
Members of Mobutu's special guards cross the Congo River from Brazzaville and attack military bases around Kinshasa in an apparent coup attempt.
UN peacekeepers battle with Lendu militias.  10 militiamen die.
UN peacekeepers battle with Lendu militias.  10 militiamen die.
Regular army soldiers clash with Banyamulenge dissident soldiers led by a former rebel.  UN forces aid the government troops.  Forces clash for several days and Bukavu falls to the dissidents.  60 die in the fighting.
Tens of thousands of people violently demonstrate against the UN, accusing it of complicity with the renegade soldiers that seized Bukavu.  UN troops open fire on the protesters in Kinshasa.
Hutu rebels kidnap 60 civilians.
Students brawl over money offered by the government in the wake of last week's riots.
A small group of the presidential guard attempt a coup.  The coup plotters claim that the transitional government has failed.
Ongoing clashes between the government and the ethnic Lendu FNI.  Sources describe the conflict as one over control of gold mines.
Clashes between government forces and rebels who seized Bukavu last month.
Hutu rebels from Rwanda attack Tutsi villages.
Hutu rebels from Rwanda attack Tutsi villages.
Supporters of the opposition party led by Etinenne Tshisekedi stone Olivier Kamitatu, the speaker of Parliament.
Hutu rebels from Rwanda attack a Tutsi village.
Gunmen abduct 2 DRC soldiers.
Ngiti militia attack a Bira village.
Unknown assailants attack government troops.
Protesters mistake a peacekeeper for a Rwandan national and begin rioting.
Protesters riot and attack a UN base over plans to repatriate a group of refuges.  UN forces fire, killing 1.
An armed gang kills three villagers and wounds an aid worker.
Rwandan rebels attack government positions.
The People's Armed Forces of Congo (FAPC) execute three children, sparking a gun battle with UN forces.
Several hundred people stage a pro-government protest against new fighting in eastern DRC.  They clash with police, leaving a dozen wounded.
Stone throwing demonstrators take to the streets to protest against rumors of a government plan to delay elections.  Several are shot dead by security forces.
Health workers strike over pay issues.
Mai Mai militia and Hutu rebels clash.
Ethnic war between Hema and Lendu.  Many massacres occur.
Armed men attack peacekeepers.
War between UN peacekeepers and FNI leads to the death of 50 militiamen.
Mai Mai storm villages claiming bicycles which they say they had been promised as part of a bicycles for firearms deal.  The group then clashes with a local militia that was protecting the villagers.
Mai Mai storm villages claiming bicycles which they say they had been promised as part of a bicycles for firearms deal.  The group then clashes with a local militia that was protecting the villagers.
Mai Mai storm villages claiming bicycles which they say they had been promised as part of a bicycles for firearms deal.  The group then clashes with a local militia that was protecting the villagers.
Mai Mai storm villages claiming bicycles which they say they had been promised as part of a bicycles for firearms deal.  The group then clashes with a local militia that was protecting the villagers.
Mai Mai storm villages claiming bicycles which they say they had been promised as part of a bicycles for firearms deal.  The group then clashes with a local militia that was protecting the villagers.
Mai Mai storm villages claiming bicycles which they say they had been promised as part of a bicycles for firearms deal.  The group then clashes with a local militia that was protecting the villagers.
Mai Mai militia clash with DRC army.
Lendu militia attack DRC soldiers.
Protesters demonstrate against the return of the president from a trip abroad.
A series of massacres committed by unknown forces, possibly Hutu militias.
2500 Pygmies emerge from their forest homes to demand equal rights.
A UN peacekeper dies in an ambush.
Supporters of an opposition party attack the offices of the president's party in a dispute over the speed of the democratic transition.  Several die in clashes with police.  The riots trigger tit for tat arson attacks.
A Hutu militia known as the Rasta massacre 19 civilians.
Militias and military forces battle.  6 die.
UN peacekeepers are ambushed as they evacuate a civilian team from the UN team's human right section.  Further attacks result in the kidnapping and death of two aid workers with MSF (Doctors without Borders).
Rwandan rebels attack government positions.
Supporters of the main opposition party clash with police.  On the 25th, the police fire on a rioting crowd, killing 4.
Police break up opposition party protests with tear gas, clubs, and plastic bullets.
Police break up opposition party protests with tear gas, clubs, and plastic bullets.
Police break up opposition party protests with tear gas, clubs, and plastic bullets.
A military unit under colonel Etienne Bindu clashes with military police for unknown reasons.
Unidentified militia massacre 15 people.
Ex members of a Mai Mai militia riot to avenge a colleague shot dead while thieving.  9 die.
Rebels massacre civilians in revenge for a recent military offensive and as a warning against collaboration by civilians with the military or the UN mission.
Hutu militia massacre civilians.
A voter registration worker is killed by militias.
Teachers strike on 9/1 and are joined by civil servants on 9/15.  Strikers demand that the government deliver on a wage increase.
Mai Mai clash with Hutu militia.
Fans protest the outcome of a match.
There is a series of militia attacks on rural villages.  Some of these villages are sites of gold reserves.
There is a series of militia attacks on rural villages.  Some of these villages are sites of gold reserves.
There is a series of militia attacks on rural villages.  Some of these villages are sites of gold reserves.
Militia forces attack a town.  They loot, rape, and commit many atrocities.  Mongwalu is the site of a gold mine.
Mai Mai militia abduct a number of election workers.  Military and UN forces free them in a gunfight that kills 34 people.
Just over 1000 people working for the media in Kinshasa protest against the murder of a journalists and his wife.
An unauthorized rally by opponents of constitutional reforms.
Lendu militia clashes with the DRC army.
DRC military forces and UN peacekeepers battle against Ugandan rebels, leaving 86 dead.
Police use batons, chains, and tear gas to violently break up a crowd of 200 UDPS protesters marching to press for guarantees of free and fair elections.
A militia group attacks government forces, resulting in at least 3 deaths.  The militia, the MRC, is not apart of the civil war until July, when it allies with the CNDP.
Unknown parties attack police officers and steal their weapons and mobile phones.
A small militia attacks DRC forces.
A small militia attacks DRC forces.
Rwandan rebels clash with the government.
Unknown militias battle government forces.
UN and DRC troops clash with a Rwandan rebel group.
Illegal miners set fire to the premises of Anvil Mining, a Canadian firm.  2 die.  The illegals had been chased from an Anvil concession the day before by the company guards.  The Anvil guards are accused of throwing an illegal down a well.
Government and UN forces battle against the MRC militia.
Rwandan Hutu rebels and Mai Mai militia battle against the government.
Rwandan Hutu rebels and Mai Mai militia battle against the government.
About 100 protesters demonstrate against repeated power cuts.  Police open fire and kill 3.
DRC military and UN forces battle with the MRC, leaving 73 militia fighters and 13 soldiers dead.
DRC military and UN forces battle with the MRC, leaving 73 militia fighters and 13 soldiers dead.
FNI clash with UN peacekeepers.  Several are held hostage by the FNI for almost a month.
Transport workers accuse the  management of the National Transport Office of embezzlement and strike to protest.
Prisoners riot at Beni Prison to protest their living conditions.  3 are killed by military forces and 10 prisoners escape.
Huhu militia from Rwanda attack a village.
Thousands of UDPS supporters march to demand cross-party talks to ensure that an upcoming election is peaceful and fair.
Between 400 and 600 rebels of the Ituri Patriotic Resistance Force attack Tchei, retaking the town from government forces.  Dozens are killed.
Protesters demonstrate to condemn fraud in the electoral commission ahead of the vote on July 30.  Police use tear gas.
Opposition parties organize tens of people to dispute the fairness of an upcoming election.
Members of a gang break into a campaign rally for Oscar Kashala and throw stones at his supporters.  Several are injured in the ensuing melee.
Gunmen open fire on a campaign rally.  The UN claims the gunmen were mainly interested in loot.
A group of youths throw stones at the president's motorcade.
A violent demonstration by supporters of the UCPS.  Protesters throw stones and rip down banners.  Police break up the demonstration.
Supporters of the MLC clash with police ahead of an election.
Gunmen ambush a convoy belonging to the Minister of Land.  2 die.
A clash between presidential and vice-presidential guards during an election.
UCPS supporters set fire to a truck carrying ballots to voting stations.  A voting station is torched the next day and UCPS supporters beat several people.
An attack on army forces attributed to deserters.
Mai Mai attack Hutus and abduct 15 people.
Mai Mai ethnic militias take control of a village, resulting in 3 deaths.
Presidential and vice presidential guards clash after election results are announced.  Both the president and vice-president are contenders in the election.  Both sides begin using artillery against one another in subsequent days.
Supporters of Jean Pierre Bemba, the vice president, protest to demand that two television stations be reopened.
Clash between military forces and the LRA.
Soldiers attack and loot a village.
Supporters of the MLC, Bemba's political party, protest against the burning of a television station, believed by many to be a deliberate act of sabotage.  The MLC forces help the police to disperse the demonstration.
Children and street dwellers burn tires and throw stones at police to protest against the suspected arson of a television station.
A militia attacks government positions.
A militia attacks government positions.
Student protest against police aggression against one of their teachers.  The event escalates to a riot and the crowd kills two people.
Supporters of rival presidential candidates attack each other during a run-off vote.
Supporters of rival presidential candidates attack each other during a run-off vote.
Supporters of rival presidential candidates attack each other during a run-off vote.
Prisoners riot and try to escape because they have not been fed.  Guard react by opening fire, killing several.
Clashes between supporters of rival presidential candidates.
Drunken soldiers kill election workers.  Civilians angry at the killings ransack 43 polling stations in Fataki.
Clashes occur between fighters loyal to rival presidential candidates as election results are counted.
Tribes clash over ethnic issues and the use of arable land.
Forces loyal to the defeated presidential candidate open fire on police trying to break up a protest against the election results.  The police use tear gas on the protesters, who number about 200.  Bemba supporters also burn cars and riot.
2006 Democratic Republic of the Congo Government
Miners engage in an unauthorized protest to gain access to a copper mine.  Some of the miners pelt police with stones.  Police open fire, killing 3.
Military forces clash with the FNI.
2007 Democratic Republic of the Congo Government
Thousands of women protest against rape and sexual assault on International Women's Day.
Hutu rebels lead 14 attacks in the Walungu and Kabare areas.  They gun down at least 1 student, kidnap another 72, and commit many rapes.
Hutu rebels lead 14 attacks in the Walungu and Kabare areas.  They gun down at least 1 student, kidnap another 72, and commit many rapes.
Military conflict between DRC military and Hutu rebels.
Journalists protest against the army, which burnt down of a TV station loyal to defeated presidential candidate Bemba during the March violence.
Rwandan rebels raid two towns and steal livestock.
Rwandan rebels raid two towns and steal livestock.
Several hundred students demonstrate against the murder of a fellow student.
Mai Mai militia and the Hutu rebel allies clash with military forces.
Military conflict between DRC military and Hutu rebels.
Gunmen attack a village.  Mai Mai militia try to respond, but fail to protect the town.
Hutu rebels from Rwanda massacre civilians.
Hutu rebels from Rwanda massacre civilians.
Hutu rebels from Rwanda massacre civilians.
Hutu rebels from Rwanda massacre civilians.
Hundreds of students protest against insecurity in Sud Kivu province and demand the government act.
The DRC military clashes with Rwandan Hutu rebels.
The DRC military clashes with Rwandan Hutu rebels.
100 prisoners riot to protest food shortages and then escape from prison.
300 UN employees strike and demonstrate against MONUC over a wage dispute.
Teachers strike over a wage dispute.
Residents of Bena Muembia village attack their rivals in neighboring villages in a dispute over land.
Residents of Bena Muembia village attack their rivals in neighboring villages in a dispute over land.
Hundreds of refugees demand to be able to return to their homes.  The police open fire, killing several.
Civil servants strike over a wage dispute.
DRC soldiers kill 5 Hutu civilians in a village.
Supporters of the politico-religious BDK movement, fighting for the independence of Bas-Congo, riot and clash with police.  The police flee from the riot, striking and killing 5 people with their car.
Students organized by the mayor of Lubumbashi clash with supporters of the provincial assembly speaker during a rally about the peace process.  The students try to take over the podium at the rally.
FRPI rebels clash with the military.
Teachers strike over a wage dispute.
A union of magistrates strikes to protest recent court appointments by the government.
FRPI rebels clash with the military.
Police open fire at hundreds of illegal miners in a dormant quarry.  An angry crowd then marches on the provincial government, leading to scuffles with police.
Hutu rebels clash with the Mai Mai.
Mai Mai raid a town.
Gunmen attack civilians on a lorry.
Students demonstrate against striking teachers and attack several of their cars.  Police open fire, but no one is killed.
Between 2000 and 3000 supporters of Jean Pierre Bemba protest against his arrest on war crimes charges in Belgium.
Mai Mai militias clash with local villagers.
Hutu rebels fire on a group of refugees.
Hutu militiamen attack a refugee camp, killing nine.
Mai Mai fighters attack two World Wildlife Fund workers over unknown causes.
Mai Mai rebels attack a military base.
A doctor's union strikes against state hospitals over a wage dispute.
More than a hundred people protest to demand compensation for damage caused by a plane crash in April.
Hundreds protest against a UN call that government troops hand back positions they seized from rebel forces.  The protesters burn cars and throw stones.  UN troops fire into the air to break up the riot.
Teachers in the capital strike against the government to compel it honor a pay agreement.
Students from the capital's 400 or so Catholic schools protest outside the ministry of education to force the government to consider the demands of striking teachers.
Hundreds of people violently protest against the UN presence in Goma by attacking the UN compound.  Demonstrators throw rocks and other missiles.  Police and UN peacekeepers fire back.
The CNDP rebel forces of Laurent Nkunda massacre at least 150 civilians.
Soldiers engage in looting and acts of brutality against the civilian population.
Soldiers engage in looting and acts of brutality against the civilian population.
Soldiers engage in looting and acts of brutality against the civilian population.
Mai Mai militia clash with the military.
DRC soldiers force the evacuation of a refugee camp and squabble over a woman, who is then shot in the cross fire.
LRA forces massacre civilians and commit many atrocities.
LRA forces massacre civilians and commit many atrocities.
LRA forces massacre civilians and commit many atrocities.
LRA forces massacre civilians and commit many atrocities.
LRA forces massacre civilians and commit many atrocities.
Between the Christmas massacres and February 1, the LRA attacks about 50 villages, committing mass killings and rapes.
Fighting occurs between a Tutsi rebel group and a Mai Mai group.
LRA forces raid a town.
LRA forces numbering just 13 attack a village and massacre 100 people.
Hutu rebels battle against DRC and Rwandan militaries.  A joint military operation siezes Laurent Nkunda of the CNDP rebels.  Soon after, the civil war ends.
Government forces clash with Hutu rebels.
LRA attacks a village, propelling refugees into South Sudan.
Violence erupts between two ethnic tribes battling over land and fishing rights.
Hutu rebels, Mai Mai militia, and Ugandan rebels commit massive acts of violence and atrocity throughout North Kivu.  At least 1500 are killed since the end of March.
Workers of the national transport office (ONATRA) strike to oust two of the agencies bosses.  Workers accuse the bosses of corruption and also denounce a sub-contracting labor scheme.
Raiders from Burundi attack Uvira, storming a jail and freeing prisoners.
Hutu rebels attack civilians, burning 7 to death.
Hutu rebels raid the civilian population.
Hutu rebels and Mai Mai loot a village.
Hutu rebels open fire on a vehicle.
LRA raids a small village.
LRA raids a group of villages 30 km southwest of Aba.
Hutu rebels attack a DRC army vehicle.
Hutu rebels burn down 130 village homes.
Government forces clash with Hutu rebels.
Hutu rebels attack a DRC army position.
Hutu rebels clash with DRC army.
Mai Mai militia raids and loots mining town.
LRA rebels attack a village.
Armed men attack a convoy of about 100 people and rob them.
Ethnic groups clash over land and fishing rights.  Tens of thousands of refugees flee into the Republic of Congo.
Ethnic groups clash over land and fishing rights.  Tens of thousands of refugees flee into the Republic of Congo.
Ethnic groups clash over land and fishing rights.  Tens of thousands of refugees flee into the Republic of Congo.
Protesters demonstrate against the insecurity caused by ongoing violence between the government and the Hutu rebels.  They damage vehicles and smash NGO office windows.
92 prisoners stage an escape from a Kindu prison.  Guards open fire, 2 die.
Students protest against high fees outside the office of the provincial governor of Katanga.  Police open fire, seriously wounding several.
Tutsi militia attacks DRC army position.
Villagers clash over land boundaries.
Villagers clash over land boundaries.
Rwandan rebels attack and kill women.
LRA rebels attack villagers.
LRA rebels attack villagers.
LRA rebels attack villagers.
Tribal insurgents attack soldiers in violence over fishing rights disputes.
Gunmen attack an army training base.
Taxi drivers strike and riot over police harassment and new taxes.
Mai-Mai militia attacks a shopping centre.
Gunmen attack UN peacekeepers.
Hutu rebels attack an army base.
A dormant rebel group attacks a Congolese town.
Armed men ordered television staff to cut TV and radio signals owned by the opposition.
Rebels rape 303 citizens.
Mai-Mai militia attacks UN peacekeepers.
Rebels kidnap the head of a local aid agency.
Gunmen attack a plane with medical supplies.
Women march against sexual violence.
Mai-Mai militia attacks a UN peacekeeping base.
Rebels attack a truck carrying 23 people, killing the driver and pushing the truck into a ravine.
Rwandan rebels attack an army base.
Government troops rape 50 women during an operation to avenge the death of one of their colleagues.
A militia group abducts and rapes 7 women.
Armed bandits raid the city airport, emptying a munitions dump.
Ex-rebels  and army deserters attack and kidnap workers of British oil company SOCO.
100 armed men stage a brazen attack on the president's home and an army logistical base.
During June, the LRA stages 53 separate attacks in the Dungu and Faradje areas, resulting in 26 deaths, 21 kidnappings (including 10 children), and five wounded.
During June, the LRA stages 53 separate attacks in the Dungu and Faradje areas, resulting in 26 deaths, 21 kidnappings (including 10 children), and five wounded.
DRC soldiers attack two villages, raping 248 people.  The colonel in charge goes rogue and flees, but eventually turns himself in a month later.
DRC soldiers attack two villages, raping 248 people.  The colonel in charge goes rogue and flees, but eventually turns himself in a month later.
Gunmen shoot dead a local community radio journalist.
Armed men raid a weapons depot, triggering a gunfight with police.
Members of the opposition UDPS demonstrate after the vandalization of their party headquarters.  Police fire tear gas, resulting in one death.
A gang attacks Kassapa prison in Lubumbashi in a spectacular raid that frees 960 inmates, including a convicted militia leader.
Rebels kill five Congolese aid workers and two other civilians.
Police fire live rounds into the air and use tear gas to disperse an opposition rally calling for fair presidential elections next month.
Riots erupt between supporters of opposing political parties ahead of a general election.
Riots erupt between supporters of opposing political parties ahead of a general election.
Gunmen shoot dead Marius Gangale, an opposition MP, ahead of a general election.
Violence occurs as opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi returns to the capital.  Thousands rally, but police block their way and rioting erupts.
Gunmen raid a military camp and an arms depot.
Presidential guard shoot dead 18 civilians during a crackdown on supporters of the opposition.
Several attacks occur in Lubumbashi on election day.  Armed men attack a polling station, and in a separate attack two jeeps carrying ballots are destroyed.  Police are attacked, and several firefights occur.
At least 24 people are killed by security forces, including 20 in Kinshasa and 2 in North Kivu and 2 in Kasai Occidental.
Violent rioting and looting occur in the capital after Laurent Kabila is declared the winner of the recent presidential election.
Presidential guard disperse a march of 30 local leaders of the UDSP who were protesting the closing of their headquarters.
Hutu rebels have conducted two attacks in the Shabunda territory of Sud Kivu, killing 26 people and wounding 13.  The army has responded with two batallions.
Clashes between rival militia groups and government forces have left 22 dead, and 35,000 have been forced to flee.  The upsurge in violence may have to do with the results of the November elections
Clashes between rival militia groups and government forces have left 22 dead, and 35,000 have been forced to flee.  The upsurge in violence may have to do with the results of the November elections
Congolese police fired live rounds at the car of opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi and fired tear gas at his gathered supporters.  Tshisekedi, who had proclaimed himself President-elect, was driving to the Presidential Palace to take office when he was stopped.
Opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi called for a general, nationwide strike to protest the results of the Novemer elections.  The stike was successful in his strongholds, but did not affect the capital.
Opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi called for a general, nationwide strike to protest the results of the Novemer elections.  The stike was successful in his strongholds, but did not affect the capital.
Police raided the home of parliamentarian Dieudonne Bakungu, who was suspected of running a militia.  4 people were killed in the raid.
Christian groups marched in Kinshasa to protest November's alledgedly fraudulent elections.  The march was banned by government forces and broken up with tear gas.
The FDLR has staged several attacks in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo, killing at least 50 civilians since the start of May.
6 villagers were killed in an attack apparently by the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda.
Villagers attacked UN Peacekeepers, angry at the lack of protection from militia attacks.  11 Pakistani Peacekeepers were injured.
Tit-for-tat clashes between the Rwandan Hutu FDLR and the Mai Mai militia in the Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo have left over 100 dead, including civilians.
UN refugee agency worker, Rocky Kalume Makabuza, was shot and killed in his home by unknown attackers.
M23 rebellion, centered in North Kivu
LRA forces attacked guards in Garamba National Park.  A firefight ensued and the rangers were able to escape through a swamp.
A local militia attacked a police station, border post, courthouse, and a military base in Kasindi.  2,000 civilians fled to Uganda following the violence.  Two soldiers were reported killed.
Members of the opposition party Union for Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS) staged a sit in protest, though were blocked from the Francophone Summit by heavy police presence.  The demonstration also accused President Kabila of rigging the vote and called for him to step down.
About a dozen armed men absucted three priests in Beni, probably by Ugandan rebels.
Five armed men broke into the home of Dr. Denis Mukwege, though he was able to escape while the attackers killed a man who tried to raise the alarm.  Dr. Mukwege is a renowned gynecologist, most known for his work on sexual assault victims.
Mai Mai militiamen attacked rangers and soldiers at Virunga National park.  Two rangers and one soldier were killed, while 5 militiamen died and one was captured.
About 50 soldiers' wives gathered and burned tires on a Goma street, protesting the advance of the March 23 rebels
Several violent demonstrations took place in various cities in response to March 23 rebel advances.  6 were killed in a protest in Bunia and UN Peacekeepers were also attacked.
Several violent demonstrations took place in various cities in response to March 23 rebel advances.  6 were killed in a protest in Bunia and UN Peacekeepers were also attacked.
Although M23 pulled out of Goma, tensions were still high as gunmen attacked the Mugunga camp for displaced persons and there were several clashes along the Rwandan border.  There were apparently several instances of rape and looting.
Unknown gunmen attacked soldiers at the Lubumbashi Airport, killing three men.  Three attackers were captured
Thousands of people danced as part of a worldwide demonstration to end violence against women and girls
Fifty-seven people were killed or wounded when a mortar shell slammed into a hospital
The DR Congo army and the Alliance of Patriots for a Free and Sovereign Congo clashed, killing at least 36 people and wounding a peacekeeper
Police fired tear gas to prevent supporters of opposition figure Etienne Tshisekedi from holding a rally
12 activists were arrested a day before they were planning to hold a rally
The Mai Mai militia, fighting for the liberation of the Katanga region, raided the city of Lubumbashi, killing four soldiers and police with 23 dead overall
Ten armed men attacked a convoy of peacekeepers, trying to take one hostage, gunfire was exchanged and one peacekeeper was killed
Fighting between M23 rebels and Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda over wells and suspected military moves led to 19 deaths
The Mai Mai Bakata-Katanga militia raided a village and burned 16 people alive in a house, and the Simba Moto militia counter-attacked and killed seven Mai Mai Bakata-Katanga fighters
The town of Kamango was attacked and briefly occupied by the Allied Democratic Forces, who looted public buildings and the hospital of medical supplies
Clashes between M23 rebels and the Congolese army left at 130 people dead, including 10 soldiers
Army helicopters attcked M23 rebel positions, who fired morters back at them, with several people killed
Army helicopters attcked M23 rebel positions, who fired morters back at them, with several people killed
Army helicopters attcked M23 rebel positions, who fired morters back at them, with several people killed
Army helicopters attcked M23 rebel positions, who fired morters back at them, with several people killed
People hurled stones at a peacekeeper convoy to protest against the fact that a new UN security zone will not take in the regions under the control of the rebel M23 movement and because food supplies need to be protected from armed groups
Four civilians were killed by shelling fire from M23 rebels
Four civilians were killed by shelling fire from M23 rebels
South African snipers killed 6 M23 rebels
UN peacekeepers or Congolese police shot dead two people and injured four in a crowd attempting to storm the mission's base during a protest decrying UN inaction
Rebels and government troops exchanged gunfire, and a peacekeeper was killed and three were wounded
Fighting between M23 rebels and government troops left two rebels dead and a government soldier injured
Fighting between the Alliance of Patriots for a Free and Sovereign Congo and the Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka militia of Mai-Mai tribal warriors militias led to the deaths of ten people, including five civilians
M23 rebels fired on a UN helicopter
M23 rebels fired on a UN helicopter
M23 rebels and the Congolese army exchanged fire in clashes that lasted three days and a peacekeeper was killed in Kiwanja
M23 rebels and the Congolese army exchanged fire in clashes that lasted three days and a peacekeeper was killed in Kiwanja
M23 rebels and the Congolese army exchanged fire in clashes that lasted three days and a peacekeeper was killed in Kiwanja
M23 rebels and the Congolese army exchanged fire in clashes that lasted three days and a peacekeeper was killed in Kiwanja
Bakata Katanga attacked a munitions depot, and three rebels and 3 soldiers were killed
Bakata Katanga, seeking independence for Katanga province, attacked the home of the military police chief, and killed one soldier
Army troops attacked some 200 M23 rebels
21 people were  raped, mutilated and beheaded by ADF-Nalu rebels in several villages
21 people were  raped, mutilated and beheaded by ADF-Nalu rebels in several villages
ADF-Nalu attacked the town of Kamango and a special UN force used helicopters to fire on the rebels and helped the Congolese army take control of the town
Armed rebels attacked the Kinshasa airport and other unspecified places in two other cities
Armed rebels attacked the Kinshasa airport and other unspecified places in two other cities
Colonel Mamadou Ndala was killed in a rocket attack on his vehicle.
Violent clashes break out between separatist rebels and the DRC Military leaving several soldiers wounded.
Rwandan rebels try to regain land in Virunga National Park. 3 rebels and 1 ranger are killed in fighting.
An armed militant group attacked the village of Pinga before being pushed out by DRC military forces.
An armed militant group summarily executed more than 70 men and women.
UN helicopter gunships attacked an ADF-Nalu rebel base.
Two assailants on a motorcycle threw a grenade at UN peacekeeping troops injuring 5.
DRC military forces dislodge the APCLS militia from Lukweti village.
Unknown assailants shoot a Belgian conservationist.
APCLS militants attack a DRC military and UN Peacekeeper base wounding several.
During a mass jailbreak 2 guards and 2 inmates are killed.
More than 30 Bafuliru men, women and children were killed as they slept in a church.
Thousands demonstrate in Kinshasa over fears of government plans to amend the constitution.
Three Pygmies were mutilated and killed by separatist militiamen. Pygmy militias retaliate and burn down several villages.
Ugandan Islamist rebels attack several towns killing dozens and displacing thousands. Violent protests break out in Beni after weeks of attacks.
Ugandan Islamist rebels attack several towns killing dozens and displacing thousands. Violent protests break out in Beni after weeks of attacks.
Ugandan Islamist rebels attack several towns killing dozens and displacing thousands. Violent protests break out in Beni after weeks of attacks.
2,000 protesters gather in Kinshasa in opposition to plans to modify the constitution to allow the president a third term.
Several hundred magistrates strike over pay.
Several hundred magistrates strike over pay.
protesters are violently repressed following an incident where UN Peacekeepers shoot and kill an unarmed civilian.
Ugandan ADF rebels kill dozens in a machete attack.
ADF-NALU rebels kill 3 with machetes before being repelled by DRC military forces. Several days later another ADF-NALU attack kills 36.
ADF-NALU rebels kill 3 with machetes before being repelled by DRC military forces. Several days later another ADF-NALU attack kills 36.
DRC military respond to ADF-NALU attack killing 1 rebel. Later, villagers burn 2 suspected rebels alive.
A state media journalist is shot dead in Goma.
Angry youths riot setting fire to government buildings after the death of at least 30 people in a boat accident.
ADF attack army and the army kills 16 ADF rebels in the North Kivu province. 
ADF attack army and the army kills 16 ADF rebels in the North Kivu province. 
Anti-Kabila protest new election laws are subdued by police by use of lethal force, at least 28 total dead according to official reports.
Police fire on anti-Kabila protesters in Goma. 
Ugandan rebels attack civilians in Beni with machetes.
Pygmy militia attack Bantu village kill 27 and loot in the southeastern province of Katanga.
FARDC attack FDLR forces in the South Kivu province.
Human rights activists and Lucha militants protest outside ANR in Goma in response to 30 arrests in the capital, security forces conduct arrests.
FDLR rebels retaliate against FARDC offensive in February. 
ADF militants attack villagers with machetes 30 Kilometers from Beni in the Nord-Kivu province.
Army attacks ADF forces and kills rebel leader. 
ADF militants attack villagers with machetes 280 kilometers north of Goma. 
Pygmy militia attack Bantu village kill between20 - 60 and loot in the southeastern province of Katanga.
A string of attacks attributed to ADF militants on UN Peace Keeping forces over the weekend and into the week.
ADF militants attack villagers with machetes, 7 bodies found in Matembo. 
ADF Militants attack villagers with machetes and kill 5. 
Beni residents protest lack of protection from latest string of attacks. 
ADF militants attack and kill 5 villagers. 
Oicha and Butembo residents protest lack of protection from authorities following string of attacks.
ADF militants attack and kill 23 villagers. 
Unknown gang attacks depots at the Goma airport and were killed by FARDC. 
ADF militants attack and kill 9 civilians.
Army launches an offensive against ADF militants.
ADF militants attack and kill 3 villagers, army engages.
FDLR attack and kill 6 soldiers.
ADF militants attack and kill 7 civilians.
Human Rights watch claims armed youths were hired by the government to repress anti-government peaceful protests.
Unknown armed attackers attack and kill 6 on army base.
ADF attacks and kills six civilians.
ADF attacks and kills six civilians.
ADF attacks and kills six civilians.
Citizens in the Lubero territory organize a stay-at-home protest to pressure the government to restore peace after nearly a year of violent attacks. 
ADF attack UN peace keeping forces, the army and civilians, 24 dead.
ADF attack on the City of Oicha, rebels and army clash leaving four dead. 
1978 Uganda Government
Police clash at mosque, attempting to evict youths involved in previous day's protest
Sugar workers attack company offices, demanding higher wages and better working conditions
Workers strike, demanding back wages
Citizens protest and riot against higher poll taxes
Junior doctors strike, demanding better working conditions and higher wages
University lecturers strike, demanding higher wages
1994 Uganda Government
Prival political groups clash during rallies
Doctors strike, demanding higher wages
Thirty-six people suspected of practicing witchcraft were hacked to death
University lecturers strike, demanding higher wages
Youths demonstrate against dissolution of Bugandan king's parliament and cabinet
Hutu extremists attack a Ugandan army base.
Merchants strike, protesting increased sales tax
Students strike over poor food and cost-sharing by government
Doctors strike, demanding higher wages
Ugandan tribesmen kill 51 Kenyan Pokots after they fled Kenyan security forces
Refugees go on a hunger strike to protest new U.N. rations distribution system
Sudanese POWs riot, alleging illegal detention
Citizens attack truck driver that killed seven in accident
Police violently disperse seminar on democracy
Taxi drivers protest new laws increasing penalties for traffic violations
The Baganda protest failure to restore confiscated land to the king
Rwandan rebels attack foreign tourists in Uganda.
Police violently disperse opposition meeting, arresting several
Citizens attack police to gain access to detained murder suspect
Police violently disperse political opposition meeting
Citizens protest disqualification of opposition candidate
Soldiers beat and arrest oposition member of Parliament
Security forces fire on opposition supporters, killing four
Truck drivers strike and block highways, protesting arrest of 2 truck drivers
Soccer players strike moments before game, demanding back wages
Citizens attack members of Parliament on election day in multiple locations.  Bodyguards kill six civilians, one bodyguard killed
Police fire on UPC supporters attempting to hold a political rally
Business owners strike, protesting presence of street peddlers
Environmentalists protest plans to begin exporting oil
Sudanese refugees protest treatment and government's decision to relocate them
Children march, asking government to end insurgency
Police force 16,000 Sudanese from the refugee camp.  When refugees resist, police fire rubber bullets and tear gas into crowd
Female workers strike and are fired, leading to protest outside of Parliament
MPs boycott Parliament, protesting insurgency in their districts
Citizens protest insurgency at peace marches in northern Uganda
Citizens protesting massacre by rebels riot
Sudanese Toposa clash with Ugandan Jie during attempts to steal cattle
Citizens protest amendment that would allow president to run for third term
Muslims protest bill that would expand protection of women's rights
Citizens protest bill that would remove presidential term limits
Traders strike, protesting higher import taxes
Citizens protest amendment that would allow president to run for third term
Students protest increase in exam fees
Citizens protest arrest of leading opposition candidate
Ugandan lawyers stage one-day strike, protesting trial of opposition candidate
Soldiers mistake citizens for rebels, killing one.  Citizens retaliate and attack soldiers, resulting in the death of 3 more civilians
Police violently disperse opposition celebration of candidate's release
Soldiers open fire on opposition rallies, killing 3
Citizens throw rocks and block roads outside president's headquarters
135 Ugandan thugs rob and rape Christians on pilgrimage to Namugongo
Lecturers' week-long strike results in student riot
Ugandan judges protest police raid of High Court
Citizens attack and kill Asian-Ugandans, protesting deforestation by Asian company.
protesters hold anti-gay demonstration, demanding deportation of American gay rights journalist
Police violently disperse political opposition meeting
Health workers strike, demanding higher wages
Teachers strike, demanding payment of back wages
Gay rights activists protest exclusion from HIV/AIDS programmes
Muslims protest acquittal of man accused of fraud in land sale to Muslim community
Karimojong tribe conducts cattle raids and clashes with soldiers in an upsurge of violence
Opposition group protests decision to renew country's electoral commission
Ethnic Baganda MPs walk out of parliament, protesting government attitude toward traditional ruler
Supporters clash with police after a representative of the tradtional ruler was prevented from traveling to political rally
Cattle raiders shoot at an aid convoy, killing a policeman escorting the aid workers.
Rioters angry over the destruction of traditional tombs in a fire try to prevent the President from visiting the tombs.  Police open fire.
The Somali al-Shabab militia bombs a restaurant and a club where civilians view the World Cup.  Arrests are made.
An anti-gay protester causes a commotion at the funeral of a murdered gay activist, leading to a scuffle with mourners.
Tear gas is used against protesters after demonstrations against recent elections turn violent.
Police shoot dead two members of a lynch mob after an alleged thief was beaten to death.
Several hundred Africans from Kenya, Somalia, Tanzania, and Uganda march against the US to protest the bombing of Libya.
Opposition protesters decry high fuel and good prices.  Police use tear gas.  Opposition presidential candidate Besigye is arrested.
Protests erupt over food and fuel prices.  Opposition leader Besignye is injured.
Food riots occur.
Food protests occur.  Police force open opposition leader Kizza Beingye's car and fire tear gas into it before then arresting him.  The protests then escalate into riots.
Lawyers protest the arrest of an opposition leader and against the crackdown on demonstrations.
After opposition leader Kizza Besigye is kicked off a flight from Kenya, riots occur in Kampala.  Riots continue as Youweri Museveni is inaugurated for a fourth term.
Protesters gather in response to a call by Activists for Change to show support for recent opposition protests about high food and fuel prices.
Police arrest an opposition member and block a protest against the president, whom demonstrators accuse of lying about his age.  Police confiscate a cake the protesters wanted to distribute to celebrate the president's '73rd' birthday.
Hundreds of women march to protest Uganda's high rate of maternal mortality.
Police use rubber bullets and teargas on protesters following an opposition leader.
Protesters demonstrate against high food prices and corruption.
A protest was held against the government
Shopkeepers engaged in strike to protest high interest rates on electricity.
Besigye was detained as he attempted to launch a demonstration with supporters over rising living costs, police fired tear gas.
Opposition activists held demonstration against rising prices, threw stones after security forces attempted to drag Besigye into a van.
Ugandan forces attacked rebel unit, rescued woman in custody who just gave birth.
Opposition supporters held demonstration, Besigye wounded when teargas canister exploded next to him.
Citizens began throwing stones at screening of Kony 2012.
Citizens demonstrated in support of gay rights and to protest gender-based violence and anti-gay bill attributed to U.S. pastor.
Opposition supporters demonstrating against police brutality engaged in violent clashes with police, policeman killed after being hit by rock.
Two journalists were beat up outside of police stations in separate incidents in the wake of opposition demonstrations.
Female activist was sexually assaulted by police officer, including the squeezing of her breast, after allegedly committing traffic violations.
Women activists demonstrated marched semi-naked, bearing their bras, to protest alleged sexual assault by police on acitivist.
Demonstrators protested in remote villages against misrule of President Museveni to escape heavy police response in capital.
Demonstrators protested in remote villages against misrule of President Museveni to escape heavy police response in capital.
Police arrests opposition leaders ahead of protests
Journalists protest the closure of independent news outlets
Opposition party protests government plot to oust Kampala Mayor
Opposition protest the ouster of Mayor of Kampala
A young girl is killed during a suspected ritual murder.
Villagers burn the home and attempt to kill a man they accuse of being responsible for a girls' death (previous event).
Two young, unemployed men infiltrate parliament to protest corruption
After Muslims are accused of burning a church and decapitating a woman, tribes clash.
Government troops try to protect a minority tribe from the dominant regional group.
Government troops try to protect a minority tribe from the dominant regional group.
Government troops try to protect a minority tribe from the dominant regional group.
Bodies are found in mass graves after tribal clashes on July 5 - considered reprisal attacks
Jobless youths protest unemployment and government corruption.
Students protest against rising graduation fees.
Protest march against high unemployment occurred.
A senior Ugandan police officer was arrested on Tuesday accused of beating several journalists, as they covered a protest.
Lead prosecutor in the ongoing trial of 13 men accused of participating in 2010 bombings that killed 76 people, shot dead by gunmen.
Students demand investigation into death of foreign minister Robert Ouko
Students demand investigation into death of foreign minister Robert Ouko
Pro-democracy advocates defy ban on protest, riots erupt.  Protest spreads from Nairobi to many towns
Pro-democracy advocates defy ban on protest, riots erupt.  Protest spreads from Nairobi to many towns
Merile cattle rustlers from Ethiopia raid a village in Kenya.  They wipe out a family of 17 and take off with 800 goats, 20 donkeys, and 40 camels.
Students protest raising of university fees
Boys in Catholic school rampage, killing 19 girls who refused to participate in protest against headmaster over exclusion from sports event
Government cracks down on pro-democracy groups
Roman Catholic groups protest pollution caused by chemical plant
Angry youths burn office of ruling party
Pro-democracy students protest against arrest of student leader, Vincetn Auka
Members of Kalenjin tribe attack members of Luo tribe over land dispute
Bank workers strike over medical benefits
Police violently break up crowds planning on holding a pro-democracy rally
Protesters clash with police after arrest of pro-democracy leaders
Kalenjin attack rival ethnic groups.  President is a Kalenjin and many suspect that the cause of the violence is upcoming transition to democracy.
Pro-democracy youths hold rally
Dockworkers strike over pay
Opposition party holds rally
Communal violence
Women hold hunger strike to demand release of political prisoners, riots erupt as unemployed youth attack police
An armed gang attacks and robs foreign tourists.
Women hold hunger strike in solidarity with Nairobi hunger strikes
Opposition party supporters disrupt rally by ruling party
Angry mob attacks police officers
Angry mob attacks police officers
Tribal clashes erupt when Kalenjin tribesmen in bands of tens to hundreds attack Luo workers and students.
Mob begins a riot in Nairobi slums. No reason given.
Students demand action regarding killings in Western Kenya
Ethnic Somali bandits attack manyattas (nomadic villages) and drive away 5000 head of cattle in revenge for a similar attack.
Protesters demand release of Imams trying to form political party
Police break up a banned opposition rally
Ethnic Somali bandits attack manyattas (nomadic villages) and steal many cattle.
Student members of Islamic Party protest at university over political prisoners and right to register as a party
Ethnic Somali bandits attack a manyatta (a nomadic village) and steal 3000 goats, and 23 camels.
Rival parties clash in Nairobi
Ruling party bars many candidates from registering to vote. Violence breaks out across country.
Cattle raiding by Sudanese against the Turkana
KANU supporters attack opposition party leaders
Clashes reported between various parties across the country on eve of election
Cattle raiding in Turkana
Islamic party riot over banning, political prisoners
Rival parties clash
Election officials demand to be paid back wages
Opposition party holds a rally.  KANU supporters and police launch large-scale anti-opposition attacks.
Mob supporting the IPK tries to stop bus carrying voters to polls.
Political unrest following election
Islamic party riots to protest banning of group
Islamic party holds strike to demand release of leader
Cattle raiding in Turkana
Protest against instability causes by Somali refugees
Extremist group attacks Kenyan Asians
Unknown attackers strike UNICEF compound
Rival Islamic factions fight one another
Islamic party holds protest, turns violent
Islamic party of Kenya holds a strike to protest tribal violence in western party of country
Somali clans wage war over cattle.
Somali bandits attack village to steal cattle
Communal violence erupts over water, land rights
Communal violence erupts over water, land rights
Lecturers strike over pay and educational quality
Ethnic clashes break out as local elections planned
Somali cattle raiders clash with government forces.
Rival parties clash during local election
Rival parties clash during local election
Communal clash over grazing land and water rights
Doctors strike in order to have union recognized
Armed gang kills 3.  Reason not given.
Armed raiders believed to be Ugandan soldiers kill two policemen and steal 300 heads of cattle.
Police evict refugees who had been staying at a sports complex
Maasai warriors attack village to avenge earlier killings
Priests organize a demonstration after their newsletter is banned
A rebel group crosses the border from Uganda, attacks police, and steals 13 guns and 1300 rounds of ammunition.
Unidentified gunmen attack offices of a human rights group
Maasai warriors force some 100 mainly Kikuyu families from their homes.
Maasai warriors force some 100 mainly Kikuyu families from their homes.
Maasai warriors force some 100 mainly Kikuyu families from their homes.
Riot police beat up two opposition leaders to prevent them from speaking at a rally
Election violence between rival parties
Police and KANU supporters beat journalists and opposition leaders
Election violence between rival parties
Bandits rob 8 Italian tourists.
Ethnic clashes in a Nairobi slum
Students riot in order to protest high food prices on campus
Armed bandits steal cattle in several villages
Armed bandits steal cattle in several villages
Armed bandits steal cattle in several villages
A gang of Kipsigis attack Luo refugees in a church.
Police clash with a gang in a two hour gun battle.
Sudanese refugees riot over food
Rival factions clash at an election to determine FORD's chairman
Busdrivers strike
Supporters of rival Sudanese leaders battle in refugee camp
Pilots strike after union leaders were suspended
Raid on a displaced persons camp.  Described as criminal.
Ethnic Somali clans wage war over grazing land and water due to a severe drought.
At least 50 people are killed by cattle rustlers.
Air traffic controllers strike for more pay
Police clash with cattle rustlers several times after the bandits kill a German tourist.
Police beat opposition legislators
Students riot after death of student leader, complaining of police brutality
200 Ethiopian tribesmen conduct a cattle raid.  Several days of clashes with Kenyan security forces follow.
Rail workers strike over unpaid wages
Police beat opposition members in several cities
Police beat opposition members in several cities
Police beat opposition members in several cities
Police break up a pro-democracy rally
Cattle raiding between rival tribes, police kill three
Police beat photo journalists
Opposition rally broken up by police Saturday, rioting follows
Students riot after parliamentary meeting, demanding greater democracy
Opposition groups hold rallies across country to press for democratic reforms
Opposition candidate attacked by thugs, thought to be political
Students hold rally after last weeks riots, mourning dead
Funerals for dead in earlier rallies, political speeches made
Rival parties clash outside of parliament
Reformist groups chant anti-Moi slogans
Air traffic controllers strike for more pay
KANU supporters demonstrate in favor of government
Reformists hold a general strike.  Mobs engage in rioting.
Armed men attack and loot several police stations, then attack migrants to the area.  Police round up suspects, who turn out to be ruling party members.
Bombing targets a police officer
Arsonists destroy a market in a tourist town.  Possibly linked to attacks in Mombassa
Students riot over lack of supplies
Police arrest opposition leaders and fire tear gas to prevent a possible rally
Ugandan tribes conduct a cattle raid, clash with police.
Angry mob riots after bandit attacks that kill 12
Teachers strike over pay
Police break up an opposition rally
Tribal fighting over land; opposition groups claim that violence is related to upcoming elections.  Police fire into a mob.
Tribal fighting over land and cattle.  Claimed to be related to upcoming elections
KANU party nominations turn violent
KANU party nominations turn violent
KANU party nominations turn violent
Nurses strike over pay
Police fire teargas to prevent presidential candidate from speaking.  Riots erupt
Violence erupts in several towns before and during elections
Three boys killed by rival tribes as they cross a district border
Rival parties fight at a ballot station
Tribal violence between Masai and Kisii
Teachers strike over unpaid wages
Tribal violence between Luo and Masaii over cattle.  Political divisions also mentioned.
Tribes affiliated with KANU attack Kikuyu, others.  Also related to cattle raiding.
Cattle raid in central Kenya.
Riots erupt after an opposition leader holds a prayer meeting
Group protests government violence
Students protests ethnic killings in Kenya
Kenyan tea producers strike over low pay for goods
Ethnic clashes are reported between Kipsigis and Kikuyus.  No deaths are reported.
Tribal fighting erupts, reason unknown.
Bank workers strike over tax policy
Students protest arrest of classmates
Protests against recent tax increases
Students protest against lowering admissions standards to medical school. Riots erupt
Students protests police harassment
Cattle raiding between rival tribes.
Sugar workers strike over pay.  Demonstration turns into a riot.
Protests over celebration of Vasco Da Gama's arrival
Bus touts and street vendors riot over allegations of police abuse
Police beat opposition members at rally
Ruling party holds rally, opposition members throw a grenade into crowd.  Grenade thrower's genitals are cut off as he is killed
Kenya's Pokot and Uganda's Karamojong tribes clash over cattle raiding.
Ugandan tribesmen cross border to steal cattle
Bandits attack Belgian tourists.
Kenyan teachers strike over pay
U.S. Embassy bombed in Nairobi
Tea plantation workers strike over pay.  Dispute with neighboring farms turns violent.
Muslims protest banning of five Islamic NGOs after embassy bombing
Muslims protest banning of five Islamic NGOs after embassy bombing
Muslims protest banning of five Islamic NGOs after embassy bombing
Muslims protest banning of five Islamic NGOs after embassy bombing
Kenyan teachers strike over pay
Ethiopian cattle rustles attack a pastoralist village in a cattle raid.
Cattle raid by Ethiopians near border.  Tribesmen backed by Ethiopian rebels.
Busdrivers strike to protest new traffic regulations
Environmental protesters against development near Nairobi
Farmers riot over low prices paid for rice by irrigation board
Opposition MPs protest outcome of elections
Riot in Somali refugee camp. Cause unknown
Violence in Sudanese refugee camp
Students protest plans to develop Karura forest
Bandits and thieves attack a bus.
Masai warriors attack rival ethnic group, claiming that they are settling on ancestral land
Bandits stage two attacks, killing a civilian woman and robbing government officials.
Police attack opposition members at a tree-planting ceremony
Supporters of rival politicians clash
Farmers fight over disaggreements about who should mill their coffee, the Kenya Planters Cooperative Union or the Thika Mills
Church leaders organize a rally to press for a constitutional review
Students protest examinations system
Students protest examinations system
Bandits rob and temporarily kidnap American tourists.
Minibus drivers strike as control of industry shifts to Transport Licensing Board.  Several die in police custody
Opposition parties demand constitutional reforms
Police raid a mosque, killing 5.  One officer killed.
Police engage in shootout with cattle rustlers
Raiders kill members of inland ethnic groups
Bandits attack and rob a car.
Ethiopian raiders kill 9 and steal 200 heads of cattle, 1500 blankets.
Students clash over proposed changes to constitution
1000 Pokot tribesmen raid a village, killing 2 and making off with 2000 cattle, goats, and sheep.  The raid occurs after Pokot vow to avenge the killing of Pokots in Uganda.
600 Pokot tribesmen raid a village, killing 29 and stealing 7000 cows, 2000 goats, and 900 donkeys.  The raid occurs after Pokot vow to avenge the killing of Pokots in Uganda.
Ethiopian raiders clash with civilians and police.
Lynch mob storms police station wanting to kill a theif in the local prison
Rival ethnic groups clash
Cattle raid against a Turkana homestead; police intervene causing a shootout
Riot breaks out at World Cup qualifying match
Cattle raid against Somali communities
Groups of bandits and cattle herders clash.
Merrile and Turkana tribesmen clash over cattle.  Merrile from Ethiopia make off with 700 head of cattle.
Traders at a market riot after a suspicious fire breaks out
Bandits attack and rob a vehicle.
Angry mob kills members of a religious sect suspected of killing babies
Muslims protest against Israeli actions against Palestinians
Muslim women protest against a gender equality bill, saying that it violates the Koran
Police break up an opposition rally
Police break up an opposition rally
KANU youth attack a campaign rally
Bandits from Ethiopia attack a town and clash with police.
Armed youth attack farmers on a plot of land near Nairobi, claiming that it is theirs
Refugees from Zanzibar hold hunger strike to protest against government's plan to relocate them
Pokots raid the Marakwets, making off with 1000 head of cattle and 2000 goats.
Masai herdsmen protest bans on beef importan in Europe after foot and mouth disease outbreak
Rival clans among Sudanese refugees clash
Mungiki religious group protest against police brutality
Police prevent opposition groups from holding a rally
KANU supporters attack rivals ahead of a local election
Kenyan Muslims protest Israeli treatment of Palestinians, then march to President Moi's office to protest discrimination against Arabs/Somalis
Sudanese Toposas and Kenyan Turkanas clash over cattle.
Muslims protest Kenyan cooperation in U.S. war on terror.  Demand that U.S. warships not be allowed in Mombassa port.
Kenyan muslims protest bombing of Afghanistan
Transport workers strike, complaining that they are harassed by corrupt police and unregistered tout operators
Rival tribes clash over food and water rights
Rival tribes clash over food and water rights
Rival tribes clash over food and water rights
Rival tribes clash over food and water rights
Rival tribes clash over food and water rights
Nubian landlords launch attacks against Luo slum dwellers over disputed rents.
Muslims riot, destroy church and school, after a muslim cleric is arrested
Sudanese Toposas and Kenyan Turkanas clash over cattle.
Riots break out after local authorities move to demolish unauthorized kiosks
Rival tribes clash
Police arrest people trying to organize a labor rally
Rival gangs in a Nairobi slum attack one another
Air traffic controllers strike for more pay
Ugandan tribesmen cross border to steal cattle
Protests erupt after Mombassa mayor is sacked on corruption charges
Homeowners in Nairobi protest against carving up forest land in Nairobi
Two Somali militiamen cross the border, intending to cattle raid, and attack a border security patrol.
Kenyan citizens storm a refugee camp to protest against job discrimination.  They claim that refugees are hired rather than locals.
Kenyans protest against low prices for firewood they sell to UN Refugee agency
Students protest/riot after a shooting death of David Sila Kimuyu
Mungiki stage a demonstration to attack opposition party members, support president Moi
Hundreds of Ethiopian tribesmen invade several villages over the course of several days in retaliation for a Turkana raid earlier in the year.
Hundreds of Ethiopian tribesmen invade several villages over the course of several days in retaliation for a Turkana raid earlier in the year.
Hundreds of Ethiopian tribesmen invade several villages over the course of several days in retaliation for a Turkana raid earlier in the year.
Teachers strike in a pay dispute with government
Pro-government thugs kill two people leaving an opposition rally
Opposition groups protest outside of a campaign stop, police fire on demonstrators
Lawyers stage a protest to demand constitutional changes
Students go on a rampage after a minibus injures a classmate
Cattle raiding incident
Rival political parties clash ahead of campaign
Election related violence reported across the country as primaries are held
Election related violence reported across the country as primaries are held
Election related violence reported across the country as primaries are held
Election related violence reported across the country as primaries are held
Unidentified gunmen attack voters on the way to a primary election
Pro-Palestinian groups attack an Israeli owned hotel
Arsonists set fire to the house of a civic candidate.
Mungiki attack rival minibus drivers for control of bus routes
Mungiki attack rival minibus drivers for control of bus routes
Youth gangs clash and burn more than 300 shacks in a battle to avenge an alleged theft of property.
Textile workers strike over pay
Kenyan Muslims protest the Iraq War
Beer drinkers protest against company after a botched promotion to give away $250 dollars.
Muslim groups demonstrate in order to maintain Islamic courts system
Muslim groups demonstrate in order to maintain Islamic courts system
Students protest against plan to replace principal
Landlords in a Nairobi slum pay thugs to forcefully evict tenants who had not paid rent
fighting at Kakuma camp broke out June 18 because of a dispute over a cow belonging to the Turkana tribe that was found in a Sudanese refugee's home
An Islamist suspect in the 2002 attack on an Israeli hotel detonates a grenade, killing himself and a police officer.
Mungiki sect members protest and riot in effort to have group legalized
Students protest against alleged favoritism at university
University staff strike over pay at all major universities
Minibus drivers strike to protest rules limiting speed and mandating seatbelts
Muslims protest against presence of US Marines on a humanitarian mission
Students protest against lack of teachers during a strike
Pokot warriors raid two villages, setting fire to dozens of huts and stealing thousands of goats and hundreds of camels.
Hundreds of armed Pokots attack a Turkana tribe and steal cattle, sheep, goats, and donkeys.
Electricity workers strike for pay and better working conditions
Opposition demonstrators demand progress on constitutional reforms
protesters demand constitutional reforms
Hundreds of Ethiopian Merrile raid the rival Turkana, killing four Turkana fishermen and three paramilitary police.
Masai stage protests in Laikipia and Nairobi over access to lands
Masai stage protests in Laikipia and Nairobi over access to lands
A gang raids a farm, killing the British farmer and robbing the place.
Students protest plans to increase fees
Traders protest the closing of a market after sanitation concerns
A Somali clan clashes with a Kenyan clan in a revenge attack provoked by a previous killing.
Clashes between several tribal groups over access to land and water
Cattle raid by Pokot against a Luhya village.  Police exchange fire wit raiders.
Anti-globalization protesters at a WTO meeting in Ukunda on the coast
Magistrates strike over pay
Murule tribesman kill Garre villagers.  Firefight with police ensues.
Protesters demand constitutional reforms
Cattle rustlers attack a pastoralist village.
Cattle raid by Pokot warriors
Some 2000 Tanzanian Sonjos raid a Maasai village in Kenya, killing two and stealing thousands of head of cattle.
Maasai protest the release of a white rancher accused of murder
Toposa cattle raiders from Sudan attack a village, killing Turkana and taking more than 500 cattle.
Maasai protest the dropped murder charges against a white rancher
Hospital workers at Kenyatta National Hospital go on strike
Sudanese Toposas attack Turkanas, killing five and taking cattle, in revenge for a similar attack by Turkanas.
Ethiopian cattle raiders attack a village in Marsabit district, killing four and taking over 100 heads of cattle.
Civil servants strike over pay
Students riot to prevent development of part of a high school
NGOs protest to demand the G8 does more to end poverty in Africa
Violence breaks out after police crack down on illegal liquor manufacturing
Tribal violence attributed to competition for pasture and water
Tribal violence attributed to competition for pasture and water
Protesters gather to oppose proposed constitutional reforms, escalates to rioting and looting
Ugandan tribe attempts a cattle raid, but is ambushed by a paramilitary unit of the police and Turkana tribesmen.
An Ethiopian gang attacks fishermen in Kenya, killing five and stealing boats, nets, ropes, and hooks.
Villagers protest allegations that a French firm encouraged bribes and sexual exploitation in hiring workers
Supporters and opponents of a new constitution clash in several locations, throwing fruit (oranges and bananas) at one another
Supporters and opponents of a new constitution clash in several locations, throwing fruit (oranges and bananas) at one another
Supporters and opponents of a new constitution clash in several locations, throwing fruit (oranges and bananas) at one another
Supporters and opponents of a new constitution clash in several locations, throwing fruit (oranges and bananas) at one another
Supporters and opponents of a new constitution clash in several locations, throwing fruit (oranges and bananas) at one another
Supporters and opponents of a new constitution clash in several locations, throwing fruit (oranges and bananas) at one another
Environmental activists protest plan to give Thailand 175 wild animals
A gang kills six people in a suspected cattle raid.
Reports of several tribal clashes over cattle, land, water
Reports of several tribal clashes over cattle, land, water
Dongiro warriors from Ethiopia attack Turkana herdsmen, killing 38 and stealing their animals.  The raid is connected to an ongoing drought.
Maasai warriors attack a squatter camp, although some insist that the attackers were really youths hired by the govt. to evict the squatters.
Flower farmers strike over pay; rioting ensues after firm sacks employees
Fighting between rival tribes over ownership of 1,600 hectares of land
Protests over cartoons depicting prophet Mohammed
Protests over cartoons depicting prophet Mohammed
Thousands protest after government raids on media offices
Students protest poor administration at the school.  Thugs break up the protest, raping 10 girls.
Kenyan traders close shops and stage protests over new regulations and taxes
Cattle raiding incident
Group of Muslims raid a Christian radio station, killing one
Pokot raiders attack Samburu, killing 10 and stealing cattle.
Cattle raiding incident
Cattle raiding incident
Vendors in Nairobi riot after police kill a seller  working the capital's streets
Cattle raiders attack a village
Ethnic Somalis explode a bomb at a hotel.
Ethiopian bandits stage a cattle raid.
Rioting erupts after the release of a person accused of rape
Cattle raiders from Ethiopia attack a village and a police station
Street vendors riot after government efforts to remove them from streets
University staff strike over pay at all major universities
Fighting between rival groups breaks out after a rape of a 6 year old girl
Cattle rustlers attack a Kenyan police station
Environmental activists call on wealthy countries to curb climate change
Police break up an attempt to hold an opposition rally
Pokot warrior raid the Turkana, killing 13 and taking 3300 head of cattle.
Sporadic attacks over land disputes
Anti-globalization activists demonstrate to oppose trade deal between EU and African states
Armed men attack a village.  Believed to be part of a land dispute in the region.
Mungiki sect members kill several rivals in a wave of killings, beheadings
Police raid a Nairobi slum to attack members of the Mungiki sect
Mugiki sect kills several in retaliation for a police crackdown.  Weeks long battle between police and Mungiki.
Armed men attack a trading post and steal cattle.
Journalists stage a protest against a proposed law that would curtail press freedom
Muslim activists hold a demonstration to press government to stop sending terror suspects abroad, fearing torture
Police raid Mungiki hideouts
Rival parties clash ahead of polls
Workers strike after the firm operating their flower farm is sold without knowledge of labor
A tribal defense force kills six people in an attack aimed at ending a government land distribution scheme.
Pro-Kibaki supporters attempt to block an opposition rally
Violence breaks out across the country as polls open for parliamentary primaries
Attack against villagers in Molo appears to be related to campaigning
Fighting breaks out after campaign rally
Man is killed by a mob during the vote
Man is murdered at a polling station
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Mob violence breaks out across the country after irregularities in election results
Riots break out after police begin arresting people with unpaid rents in a Nairobi slum
Armed men attack villagers in an apparent land dispute
Government launches assault on group suspected of killings
Government launches assault on group suspected of killings
Rival tribes fight over location of internal border
Rioting erupts after the murder of a woman
Rioting erupts after the murder of a woman
Ethnic groups clash over cattle in a series of battles.
Ethnic groups clash over cattle in a series of battles.
Protest erupt over delays in unveiling a coalition government
Mungiki begin to attack police after wife of their leader is killed
Mungiki begin to attack police after wife of their leader is killed
Mungiki begin to attack police after wife of their leader is killed
Mungiki begin to attack police after wife of their leader is killed
Mungiki begin to attack police after wife of their leader is killed
Mungiki begin to attack police after wife of their leader is killed
Bandits steal cattle and kill five people over two days.
Prison workers strike over pay
6 bodies found, SLDF suspected of responsibility
Witches are killed, accoused of making bright children dumb
Witches are killed, accoused of making bright children dumb
Community groups protest rising food prices, demand government assistance
Farmers protest government decision to lower wheat import duty
Raiders kill five and steal 200 cattle.
Students riot at 20 schools to demand better conditions and management
Somali raiders attack a camp, killing three civilians and two police and steal arms and ammunition.
Clans clash over cattle rustling.
Gunmen from Somalia abduct two nuns and take them back into Somalia.
Electoral commission employees go on hunger strike to protest government moves to disband the body
Journalists, others stage a protest to oppose a new media bill
Muslims protest Israel's deadly raids in the Gaza Strip
Public school teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Students clash with police after failing to hand over the bodies of slain activists
A Kenyan religious sect/gang riots, protesting the alleged existence of police death squads
Students' protest over slaying of activists turns into violent riot
Villagers clash with members of the Mungiki sect over extortion
Kenyan women abstain from sex for a week to protest rift between President and Prime Minister
Slum residents protest, demanding the government remedy their poor living conditions
Massai pastoralists riot and attack flower farmers after a local boy drowns in an irrigation channel
Airline workers strike, demanding large pay increases.  Union officials are arrested.
Taxi drivers protest a local spree of violence against them, alleging the involvement of the Mungiki sect
Villagers attack and kill members of the Mungiki sect
Muslims protest against the detaining of a radical Jamaican cleric.
Members of the Mungiki sect attack motorcycle taxi drivers for failing to pay taxes.  Police attack the Mungiki sect, killing 7.
Somali insurgents attack a Kenyan paramilitary security camp.
Unknown gunmen attack a Saudi gunman.
Massai tribesmen protest the drilling of four geothermal wells, citing environmental and health damage.
Somali insurgents attack a Kenyan village.
Unknown attackers set bombs at a political rally protesting the new constitution.
Kenyan police ambush members of the Mungiki sect, killing one.
Suspected Somali insurgents bomb a downtown bus station, killing one.
A small protest near parliament over food price increases.
Suspected cattle rustlers from Ethiopia kill 38 people.
Raiders from Samburu raid Isiolo and steal cattle.
Refugees at the world's largest camp riot over the bulldozing of makeshift businesses.  Police use tear gas.
Police fire tear gas at protesters marching on the president's office to demand action over a growing food crisis.
More than 200,000 teachers strike to protest the diversion of government funds meant to hire more teachers and ease classroom overcrowding.
A British tourist is killed and another is kidnapped in an attack at a beach resort.
A French tourists is kidnapped by suspected Islamic militants.
Kidnappers abduct two Spanish aid workers.
Islamic militants stage multiple grenade attacks in Nairobi.  The event comes just days after Kenya's intervention in Somalia.
Islamic militants attack a civilian vehicle with RPGs.
Islamic militants attack a church.
A landmine targeting police at a refugee camp kills two.
Militants destroy a Kenyan army truck.
Unknown bombers kill a police officer.
Unknown bombers attack a troop convoy.
An explosion wounds several people during independence day celebrations.
Militants throw grenades in a northern town.
Several bombings occur at the Dabaab refugee camp.
An unidentified gunman shot a refugee leader several times, killing him.
Two tribes clashed in northeast Kenya, leading to the deaths of three adults and three children.
Parents protested and rioted, decrying widespread failures of high school entrance exams. 10 Primary schools were closed.
Islamist militants fired on police forces and kidnapped local government officials to retaliate for Kenya's involvement in the Somali conflict.
Military officers rounded up and brutally beat locals who walked too close to a military camp.
The Gabra and Borena clans clashed in northern Kenya, displacing tens of thousands of locals. Tensions over water and pasture land drove already tense relations to a head.
Unidentifed gunmen opened fire on citizens, killing two.
Gunmen shot a police reservist in a Kenya-Somalia border town. Locals pursued and killed one of the gunmen, but were prevented from catching the other two when one tossed a grenade at the oncoming mob, wounding several.
40,000 health workers went on strike after the government failed to follow through on promised salary increases. In response, the government threatened to fire all of them.
Residents of a coastal town protested the government's decision to make their town into a major port, oil refinery, and rail hub. The locals called for greater transparency and for the government to consider the potential environmental impact the project will have on locals.
Sex workers marched in Kenya's capital to call for the legalization of their trade.
Al-Shebab militants threw grenades from a moving car at a bus station, killing at least five and injuring dozens more.
Armed men pulled two suspected Al-Shebab sympathizers off of a bus and kidnapped them. One was later found dead.
Armed men pulled two suspected Al-Shebab sympathizers off of a bus and kidnapped them. One was later found dead.
Gunmen shot and killed two refugees in an apparent revenge killing. A third man was injured.
A Christian religious gathering and a popular restraunt were both attacked with grenades. One person was killed and around 18 were injured.
A Christian religious gathering and a popular restraunt were both attacked with grenades. One person was killed and around 18 were injured.
Members of a separatist political faction protested outside a court house to challenge a legal ban on their organization. One protestor was killed by a thrown rock.
A man detonated a grenade during church services, killing one. Churchgoers suggested the attack was due to a land dispute over the ground the church was built on.
A police convoy hit an improvised IED, killing one and injuring several others.
Gunmen opened fire on and tossed grenades into a popular restraunt, killing one. One attacker was arrested.
A suspected terrorist was abducted by unknown assailants after his car broke down.
Another group of attackers lobbed a grenade into a restraunt, injuring three.
Refugees were targeted in a grenade attack. Five were injured, but none killed.
A bomb ripped through shops in downtown Nairobi, injuring dozens.
A grenade tossed into a caf_ window killed one and injured four others.
Several police officers were attacked on a routine patrol in a town on the eastern border.
A female refugee leader was targeted with an explosive device. Three were injured in the resulting explosion.
Police were wounded by an improvised explosive device near the Somali border.
Unknown attackers tossed a grenade into a crowded bar, killing and injuring several patrons.
Gunmen kidnapped several international aid workers, killing their driver. They were taken to Somalia, but freed by Kenyan and Somali forces.
Masked gunmen attacked two churches, killing 17 and wounding many more with indiscriminate fire and grenade tosses.
Attackers tossed grenades into a restruant and shop near the border region, injuring four.
Attackers detonated a bomb as aid workers distributed non-food items to refugees. Several were injured.
Another man was killed by a grenade.
After the Pokomo farming community protested the pastoralist Orma grazing cattle on their farms, the Orma responded with violence. The next week Pokomo villagers raided an Orma village, killing dozens.
Muslims rioted and called for violence after the radical cleric Aboud Rogo Mohammed was shot and killed. Cars and churches were targeted in the ensuing violence.
The Orma and Pokomo tribes borke into tit-for -tat violence again, leading to dozens of deaths, including those of several police officers attempting to intervene. A government-enforced curfew failed to take hold.
The Orma and Pokomo tribes borke into tit-for -tat violence again, leading to dozens of deaths, including those of several police officers attempting to intervene. A government-enforced curfew failed to take hold.
The Orma and Pokomo tribes borke into tit-for -tat violence again, leading to dozens of deaths, including those of several police officers attempting to intervene. A government-enforced curfew failed to take hold.
The Orma and Pokomo tribes borke into tit-for -tat violence again, leading to dozens of deaths, including those of several police officers attempting to intervene. A government-enforced curfew failed to take hold.
The Orma and Pokomo tribes borke into tit-for -tat violence again, leading to dozens of deaths, including those of several police officers attempting to intervene. A government-enforced curfew failed to take hold.
The Orma and Pokomo tribes borke into tit-for -tat violence again, leading to dozens of deaths, including those of several police officers attempting to intervene. A government-enforced curfew failed to take hold.
Teachers went on strike to demand higher pay for three weeks before the government gave in.
Muslims protested against the United States
Doctors went on strike to protest the poor state of their equipment, demanding  the government put more money towards providing adequate health care.
An explosive device was set off in an Anglican Sunday school, killing one child and injuring three others.
Citizens marched in Kenya's capital to protest Parliament's decision to increase their own salaries by the equivalent of $110,000, a bonus that would likely lead to tax hikes.
Police raided the home of a (legally sanctioned) separatist group leader, killing two and arresting dozens. Later a local man was stabbed to death, suspected of having tipped off the police.
A police raid turned deadly when suspected Islamists threw a grenade at the police. One policeman and two suspects were killed.
A candidate for one of Kisumu's parliamentary seats was shot and killed while in his car. Locals rioted in response, accusing the police of being lax or even supporting the murder. Three rioters were killed in a building, but it was uncertain if this was due to tear gas or an electrical fire.
Members of the semi-nomadic Turkana tribe raided a Samburu village, killing twelve and stealing livestock.
Two unidentified men tossed a grenade into a church during prayers, killing one policeman.
Cattle rustlers ambushed police forces tracking them, killing dozens.
A grenade was tossed from a passing vehicle into a local leader's home, injuring several.
Gunmen attacked and killed two police.
An improvised explosive device on a commuter bus killed nine and wounded dozens more. In response, locals attacked and rioted against those of Somali descent, blaming them for the attack.
Another three soldiers were killed in a grenade attack. Riots broke out in response and police were unable to quell them before one person was killed and many were wounded.
Minibus crews went on strike to protest a new law that increased fines for traffic violations.
A bomb detonated in rush hour traffic killed one and hospitalized several others.
Unknown attackers hurled a grenade at people leaving a mosque after evening services, killing five.
Based on a tip that MRC members were plotting a raid on police stations, security forces raided them first, killing several in the ensuing firefight.
Attackers set off a bomb at a poll registration center, wounding one.
Two bombs wounded several in a mostly Somali Nairobi neighborhood.
The Pokomo raided an Orma village, hacking women and children to death and setting fire to houses. This was apparently due to arguments over food and water.
Two people were killed and several injured in a grenade attack on a restaurant at a refugee camp
Four people, including three police officers, were wounded when a grenade was thrown at a police vehicle
A hundred people from the Pokomo tribe launched a pre-dawn attack on the Orma village of Nduru, carrying out killings and setting fire to homes and two of the attackers were set on fire by resident
At least 10 people were killed in a retaliatory raid by more than 100 attackers armed with machetes, guns, spears and bows against the Pokomo village of Kibusu
Gunmen, believed to be Somali militants, attacked a hotel restaurant and killed five and wounded six
Hundreds of demonstrators angered at the conduct of outgoing Kenyan legislators doused 221 coffins with gasoline and set them on fire in an organized protest outside parliament
Violent protests erupted after many candidates said that the voting process was unfair and that party bosses favored certain contestants in their nominations
A soldier was killed and three people injured after attackers threw a grenade at a soldier
30 police officers were pursuing cattle thieves and three were shot dead in the pursuit and three locals were also killed
A police officer was shot and killed
Gumen opened fire on a vehicle as it drove, killing one and injuring several others
Cattle raiders killed at least seven people when they raided a village and police pursued them to recover the cattle
A suspected militant died while planting an bomb at a venue where one of the country's presidential contenders was going to hold a campaign rally
A political aspirant was shot and wounded by armed men
Gunmen opened fire at a mosque and killed seven people
Scuffles broke out at Prime Minister Raila Odinga's rally between security and reported opposition supporters
A Red Cross paramedic and a driver were killed in an attack that was meant to kill a candidate for parliament
Gunmen stormed and took control of two polling stations
A remote-controlled bomb was set off
In several attacks, at least 200 youths armed with guns and bows and arrows attacked police, with 19 people killed, including several of the attackers
In several attacks, at least 200 youths armed with guns and bows and arrows attacked police, with 19 people killed, including several of the attackers
A grenade blast went off at a vote tally center
Grenade blasts hit two Somali areas of Nairobi and one person was injured
Youths gathered near a vote tallying center and began rioting, drawing a response from police, who opened fire and killed one person
 at armed police, and after Kenyatta was elected, they began stoning police
Police threw tear gas on crowds supporting  prime minister Odinga as he filed a petition asking the Supreme Court to void the presidential election
100 members of the Mombasa Republic Council tried to attack a casino and killed a police officer, and dozens of men later attacked a police station, where police fired on them, killing six
Clashes between youths and the police erupted after the Supreme Court upheld Kenyatta's election victory and police fired shots and injured several people, with two people shot in unclear circumstances
Odinga supporters protested after the Supreme Court upheld the election of Kenyatta and police fired tear gas and shot and killed three people who were rioting
Youths threw stones at police, and police fired tear gas
Gunmen walked into a local hotel and open fire indiscriminately at the patrons, killing 10
 at Francis Atwoli, the secretary general of the Central Organization of Trade Unions, for supporting a hefty pay raise for parliament members and after being beaten he was arrested
40 patients overpowered guards and forced open the door of their ward in the Mathari Mental Hospital
 domonstration to protest parliament's greedy salary demands
Suspected terrorists began throwing grenades at officers during a raid, and the officers threw tear gas and opened fire and killed the suspects
Gunmen shot and killed an officer with a paramilitary security unit
Shebab insurgents carried out an attack on a police post, killing two police officer and four civilians and looting goods
Attackers on a motorbike threw a bomb into a church service, wounding seven people
A grenade was thrown in a largely ethnic Somali district, wounding three people
 and spilled cow blood outside parliament to protest political leaders' attempts to raise their salaries
Unidentified gunmen attacked a pickup truck laden with passengers, killing six, including schoolchildren
Police shot and killed two suspected al-Shabab militants in their homes
Fighting between members of the Degodia and Garreh clans led to the deaths of 9 people
Fighting between members of the Degodia and Garreh clans led to the deaths of 9 people
Fighting between rival ethnic Somali clans over elected posts at a camp for displaced persons led to the deaths of 16 people and 20 more were injured
About 40 heavily armed Shebab militants carried out a raid on a police post, killing a police officer and three civilians
An British ex-army officer hacked to death in an attack on his cattle ranch
Automatic weapons and rocket-propelled grenades were used in clashes between the Borana, Gabbra and Burji clans, who were fighting over water and pasture for their cattle
A group of men took to the streets waving placards denouncing the International Criminal Court
61 civilians and 6 members of the security forces were killed and several hundred others wounded when 4 Shebab fighters attacked a Nairobi shopping mall and held the mall under siege for four days
Shebab militants killed one and wounded four when they threw a grenade at a market in an attack meant to force Kenyan troops out of Somalia
Shebab militants raided a Kenyan police base and killed two officers and injured three others, set fire to vehciles before leaving and made off with weapons and ammunition
Gunmen assassinated a Muslim preacher and his three companions in a drive-by shooting
protesters took to the streets after the assassination of a popular Muslim preacher, and a church was torched and rioting ensued in which four people were killed and several were arrested
Police fired tear gas to disperse stone throwing youths who were protesting the alleged arrest of a Muslim cleric
About 300 women marched to protest the fact that individuals that raped a 16-year-old girl were not imprisoned for their actions
Dozens of people were killed in week long clashes between the Borana, Rendille, Gabra and Burji communities and arrests were made
300 journalists and civil rights activists marched to protest an attempt by lawmakers to stifle criticism by pressuring journalists with fines
A Muslim cleric was gunned down by armed men on a motorbike
Eight people, including five policemen, were killed when a police car was sprayed with bullets
At least one person was killed and three others seriously injured when twin explosions went off at the town market
A bus explosion killed five people and wounded more than 30 and the blast also hit several cars near the bus, killing another person and one suspect was arrested
A human rights worker was shot and wounded by an armed gang of 6 who stormed his house
A Muslim cleric was shot dead by unidentified gunmen while walking home from a mosque
Unknown attackers fired a grenade at a restaurant targeting foreign visitors.
Four men associated with al-Shabab attacked a restaurant in Nairobi's airport by placing an explosive device in a trash can.
Police stormed the Masjid Musa mosque based on intelligence that a meeting recruiting fighters was going on at the time.
Journalists protested in front of the Egyptian Embassy in support of jailed journalists in Egypt.
Young men rioted in protest of arrests carried out by the police during at attack on a mosque.
Kenya's National Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission protested an anti-homosexuality bill in Uganda.
Civil society activists protested again corruption, lack of security, unemployment, and poverty.
Unknown gunmen attacked an evangelical church, killing 6 and injuring dozens.
Police killed two suspects of an attack on an evangelical church on March 23 in a gunfight in Mombasa.
Women deputies stormed out of the parliament to protest an adoption of a polygamy bill.
Two explosions occurred in a Somali district of Nairobi, killing 6 people and inuring dozens. Police arrested 657 suspects.
Unknown attackers murdered a vocal supporter of radical Islam - Muslim cleric Abubaker Shariff Ahmed.
Little Mogadishu. 91 Somali citizens were deported.
A car explosion killed 4, including 2 police officers when car was stopped at a traffic light for questioning.
Twin blast attacks in Mombasa killed 4 and injured 15.
Twin blast attacks in Nairobi killed 3 and injured 86.
Two bombs went off in a market in Nairobi, killing 10 and injuring 70.
Al-Shebab attacked 4 vehicles near a border with Somalia, killing 12 people.
Student protested over tuition increases.
Al-Shebab attacked a military convoy near Lamu, killing 2 Kenyan soldiers.
Garre clan attacked Degodia clan in retaliation for three killings allegedly carried out by Degodia members.
Two al-Shebab operatives killed in a gunfight with police after they refused to stop the car at a checkpoint and threw three grenades at the police
Citizens protested a killing of two men by the police on May 31, claiming their innocence.
A moderate Muslim cleric Mohamed Idris killed in Mombasa by unknown gunmen.
Al-Shebab militants stormed into Mpeketoni, Poromoko, and Majembeni, opened gunfire on Christian citizens and set buses, hotels, and other buildings on fire.
Al-Shebab militants stormed into Mpeketoni, Poromoko, and Majembeni, opened gunfire on Christian citizens and set buses, hotels, and other buildings on fire.
Al-Shebab militants stormed into Mpeketoni, Poromoko, and Majembeni, opened gunfire on Christian citizens and set buses, hotels, and other buildings on fire.
Youth blocked roads with burning tires in an anti-opposition protest.
Security forces killed 5 suspects of an attack on Mpeketoni and neighboring villages, other suspects escaped.
Clashes between clans erupted over access to land and grazing for livestock
Hundreds of protesters marched ahead of trial for suspects, demanding justice for a schoolgirl who was gang raped in 2013.
Unknown gunmen attacked Witu, killed 11 people.
Al-Shebab attacked towns killing over 20 men and torching several houses.
Al-Shebab attacked towns killing over 20 men and torching several houses.
Unknown gunmen attacked an office of the Lamu Conservation Trust, setting the camp and vehicles on fire.
Unknown gunmen threw a grenade at a restaurant in Wajir, killing 1 and injuring many.
The main opposition party protested the president on the grounds of growing insecurity, corruption, and rising cost of living
Unknown gunmen raided the Pandanguo village, stealing guns from police reservists, torching houses and robbing people.
Al-Shebab opened fire of a bus near Witu and targeted a police car which stopped to intervene.
Unknown gunmen opened fire in the Soweto slum of Mombasa, killing 3.
Turkana men protest circumcision enforced by Bukusu ethnic group - major ethnic group in the area.
One person killed and 13 injured in an attack on two villages.
One person killed and 13 injured in an attack on two villages.
People march for increased protection of Kenya's wildlife.
Kenyan soldiers killed 5 Islamic extremists near a border with Ethiopia, who were trying to enter Kenya in a car full of explosives and suicide vests.
Five people, including 3 policemen, killed in Kapedo by Pokot tribe members.
20 police officers and 2 civilians killed in Kapedo by Pokot tribe members, who mistook them for another attacking tribe.
Attackers with machetes attacked a military guard, troops opened fire killing 5 attackers.
Men attacked and stripped a woman for wearing a miniskirt.
Security forces attacked two mosques in Mombasa based on allegations of a planned attack. 1 man was shot as he attempted to throw a grenade at the police, over 200 people were arrested, ammunition, and grenades were seized.
Armed men attacked the Kisauni district of Mombasa in revenge for police raids on local mosques.
Women protested a recent gang attack on a woman wearing a miniskirt.
inappropriately dressed, over 100 participants were arrested.
Security forces attacked two mosques in Mombasa, arresting over 100 people and seizing grenades and ammunition.
al-Shabab attacked a bus heading to Nairobi, killing 28 non-Muslims in revenge for security forces' attacks on mosques in Mombasa.
Members of unions representing doctors, teachers, and civil servants protested the deteriorating security situation following an al-Shebab attack on a bus in Mandera, which killed 24 teachers and 3 medics.
Attackers followed and shot at officers, killing one and injuring another.
Unknown gunmen opened gunfire and threw 3 grenades at a bar in Wajir, killing 1 and injuring 12.
Al-Shebab executed 36 non-Muslims after storming a quarry near Mandera.
Al-Shebab is suspected in a road side bomb attack against police in the Lamu district that killed 5. 
Ongoing rivalries between pastoral communities have killed over 300 people, wounded approximately 200 and caused the displacement of 220,000 people. 
Ongoing rivalries between pastoral communities have killed over 300 people, wounded approximately 200 and caused the displacement of 220,000 people. 
Ongoing rivalries between pastoral communities have killed over 300 people, wounded approximately 200 and caused the displacement of 220,000 people. 
Ongoing rivalries between pastoral communities have killed over 300 people, wounded approximately 200 and caused the displacement of 220,000 people. 
Gunmen, allegedly al-shabab, target and kill a pastor outside the entrance of a primary school that hosts several religious groups.  
Journalists protest outside UN offices in Nairobi. They demand the release of jailed Al Jazeera journalists.
Soldiers track and kill Al-Shebab fighters as they fled to cross into Somlia. One Kenyan soldier is killed and five al-shebab.
Approximately a 100 school children and a few activists protest the seizure of the school's playground. Policy use tear gas to disperse the children. 
Local MPs lead a protest against the Narok governor for stealing the tourism fees from the Massai Mara park.
Teachers in the North strike fearing attacks from Al-Shebab.
Teachers from the Northern region of Kenya protest in front of the Parliament over insecurity demanding to be transferred. 
Unknown gunmen target and kill a Member of Parliament. 
Al-Shebab attack the convoy carrying Madera county Governor Ali Robe, killing two police officers and on civilian.
Suspected Al-Shebab Islamists attack civilians in Madera, suspected to be non-Muslims.
Al-Shebab Islamists attack and kill four people in Weir town. 
An Undercover detective was shot and killed in Mombasa. The reason is unknown. 
Al-Shebab Islamists attack a University killing 147 students after laying siege to the University for 13 hours. Al-Shebab claims that the attacks were retaliation against Kenyan troop fighting them in Somalia. 
Students protest in the capital about the emergency response at the University massacre. Students are angered over the perceived delayed in the arrival of security and emergency personnel on the scene. 
Turkana people attack and a Pokot village in Northern Kenya. Between 54 and 75 people have been killed with what started as a cattle raid and has lasted several days in ethnic retaliatory fighting.
Al-Shebab Islamists attack a village along the Somali border, no one reported causalities in the attack.
Al-Shebab militants attack a small village in Weir County. Residents believe they were targeting a local administrator who is outspoken against the Islamists.
More than a thousand young men and women embarked on a month long peace walk from Garissa to Madera to highlight the growing insecurity in the country. The group will make several stops along the way in remote villages. 
More than a thousand young men and women embarked on a month long peace walk from Garissa to Madera to highlight the growing insecurity in the country. The group will make several stops along the way in remote villages. 
Al-Shebab militants attack an army base and take over a village in Lamu county. Al-Shebab has been dedicated to fighting in Kenya in retaliation of Kenyan troops fighting the militants in Somalia. 
Al-Shebab militants attack an army base and take over a village in Lamu county. Al-Shebab has been dedicated to fighting in Kenya in retaliation of Kenyan troops fighting the militants in Somalia. 
A local government administrator was gunned down by suspected Al-Shebab militants. Al-Shebab has been carrying out retaliatory attacks in Kenya for Kenyan troops fighting Al-Shebab in Somali. 
Kenyan officials have been cracking down on illicit production of alcohol in Nairobi and Kenya. 8 people have been killed, 1 shot by officials and 7 by a methanol truck exploding during an arrest. 
Kenyan officials have been cracking down on illicit production of alcohol in Nairobi and Kenya. 8 people have been killed, 1 shot by officials and 7 by a methanol truck exploding during an arrest. 
An anti gay protest takes place Nairobi but is quickly abandoned due to low turnout. The protest is ahead of President Barack Obama's visit in which he is expected to advocate for gay rights in the country.
Al-Shebab attack a convoy of passenger busses and their army escorts. In addition, they attack workers killing 14. 
Al-Shebab attack a convoy of passenger busses and their army escorts. In addition, they attack workers killing 14. 
Running champions join together for a March for Peace through the Turkana region. They aim to make a statement against ethnic violence and growing insecurity in the region. 
Running champions join together for a March for Peace through the Turkana region. They aim to make a statement against ethnic violence and growing insecurity in the region. 
Running champions join together for a March for Peace through the Turkana region. They aim to make a statement against ethnic violence and growing insecurity in the region. 
Teachers in the eastern portion of the country strike, closing all schools in the region over inadequate pay. 
A man was arrested after attempting to enter a shopping mall with a suicide bomb. No one was killed. 
Protest gather against a new government corruption scandal in the Bungoma district. 
Kenya launched a counter offensive against Al-Shebab militants in the northeast of the country.
Conservationists march in the capital joining a Global March to bring to light poaching and illegal trade in animals. 
50 athletes associated with the Professional Athletes Association occupied the headquarters of Athletics Kenya demanding the resignation of the president over doping and corruption.
Pro-government protests gather outside the parliament and Supreme Court buildings in support of recent government action against corruption in the country. Police use tear gas and arrests ti break up the protesters.
Al-Shebab attack soldiers killing one and wounding two. The militants have been carrying out retaliatory attacks across the country. 
Al-Shebab suspected roadside bomb kills five police officers. 
Al-Shebab attack a police convoy carrying goods and shot and killed two people including a police officer. The militants have been carrying out retaliatory attacks in the country. 
Al-Shebab attack a passenger bus travelling to Madera killing two and six people were wounded. 
An Al-Shebab militants died while the roadside bomb he was planting exploded. 
Al-Shebab ambush policemen killing two and wounding two. 
Students boycott classes, protesting insufficient class allowances
Students boycott classes, protesting insufficient class allowances
Citizens hold illegal demonstration demanding multi-party system
Air traffic controllers strike, demanding better working conditions and higher wages
Fundamentalist Muslims hold religious meeting against government order
Students throw stones at Asian-Tanzanians and damage property
Hutus riot in protest of plan to remove Hutus involved in massacre from refugee camp
Doctors Without Borders withdraw from refugee camp protesting treating those involved in Rwandan genocide
Doctors Without Borders withdraw from refugee camps across Tanzania protesting non-prosecution of Hutu war crimes
Political rallies of first multi-party elections turn violent
Citizens protest Court's rejection of opposition's election challenge, charging Courthouse and stoning cars
Tazara railway workers strike, demanding higher wages
Tanzanian police use tear gas, guns and beatigs to force Rwandan refugees out of Tanzania
Tanzanian police forcefully expel Burundian refugees, beating and stealing from them
Seventeen members of CUF go on hunger strike to protest unsatisfactory handling of their case
Lecturers strike demanding higher wages
Muslims protest suppression of Islam by government
Muslims protest after police cancel scheduled demonstration
Students riot, protesting upgrading of college to university
Al Qaeda bombs U.S. Embassy, killing 10
Former Rwandan mayor leads hunger strike, protesting legal proceedings of ICTR
Opposition supporters protest ban on demonstrations
Suspect in U.S. Embassy bombing goes on hunger strike, protesting repeated postponements of trial
Elderly women suspected of witchcraft are attacked across the country
Muslims protest anti-Islamic treatment by government
U.S. Embassy bombing suspects boycott trial, protesting prosecution delays
CUF supporters attack police who refused them entry into treason trial of CUF leaders
Police storm CUF member houses, leading to violence
Miners clash with Sonje tribesmen after tribesmen steal from tanzanite mines
Opposition and ruling party supporters violently clash after campaign rally
CUF legislators boycott Parliament, protesting elections.  Government retracts seats and redistributes them
Opposition supporters clash with police leading up to elections
CUF legislators boycott Parliament, protesting undemocratic elections
Pastoralists and farmers clash over land rights
Supporters of two separate parties throw stones at each other
Police beat and arrest Muslims alleged to be CUF supporters during prayers
Police violently disperse political rallies, killing 16 and arresting over 400
CUF supporters protest police violence and undemocratic elections
Burundian rebels raid a refugee transit center, forcing several refugees back into Burundi.
CUF supporters fleeing violence resist arrest by throwing stones at police
Opposition supporters protest undemocratic elections and demand new ones
Afgem guards and small-scale miners clash over construction of new mines
Opposition groups demand new elections on Zanzibar
CUF supporters attacked by ruling party supporters during fundraiser to help victims of political violence
Rwandan genocide suspects go on hunger strike, protesting unfairness of tribunal
Muslims protest arrest of preacher convicted of disparaging Christianity
Citizens hold peaceful rally, demanding resignation of Industry and Trade Minister over sugar prices
Opposition supporters protest decsion to buy British air traffic control system, citing high price
Unknown Tanzanian attackers set Burundian refugees on fire.
Unknown Tanzanian attackers set Burundian refugees on fire.
Opposition supporters hold demonstration, marking one-year anniversary of political violence
Utility workers protest government transfer of electric supplies to South African firm
Bank workers strike, demanding better work conditions and higher wages
Police violently disperse Muslim gathering; Muslims fight back against police and damage property
Students protest possible war in Iraq
Opposition supporters attempt to take over poll booth and are dispersed by police
Muslim citizens protest U.S. intimidation in Iraq
Citizens hold marches to commemorate 40-year anniversary of overthrowing Omani sultanate
Muslims attack police after protest banned
Students protest parliament bill that would implement cost-sharing
Genocide suspects boycott trials, protesting possible relocation of tribunal to Rwanda
Unknown assailants torch 3 mosques in one week
CUF and CCM supporters clash; riot police intervene, killing 1
CUF and CCM supporters clash, injuring 25 and destroying property
Citizens riot before elections, injuring approximately 50 and destroying property
Police raid public recreation centre to beat and arrest opposition supporters watching televised speech
CUF and CCM supporters clash outside presidential candidate's home
Muslims hold rally protesting U.S. desecration of Islam in Guantanamo Bay
Youths suspected of supporting CCM beat CUF supporters and torch houses
Over 65 people were seriously injured during multiple clashes between opposing party supporters
Police fire into crowd at CUF rally
In two separate incidents, CCM supporters attack small numbers of CUF supporters, including one legislator
Citizens attack police guarding election booths and alleged 'fraudulent' voters in multiple areas
Police violently disperse multiple celebrations by CUF supporters
Citizens clash with police after ruling party announced winner
Opposition legislators boycott Parliament, citing undemocratic elections
Citizens in Zanzibar dispersed by police after trying to stop others from voting; an election monitor is stabbed and property burned throughout Zanzibar City
Citizens protest misrepresentation of Tanzania by film Darwin's Nightmare and response provoked by international community
Citizens protest misrepresentation of Tanzania by film Darwin's Nightmare and response provoked by international community
Citizens riot and attack Zambian guards after death of Tanzanian guard in Zambian custody
Citizens protest arrival of President Bush in Tanzania
The arrest of an opposition party leader during an anti-corruption rally sparks further protests.  The police open fire, killing 2.
Tens of thousands of Chadema supporters protest the government killing of a protester.
Around 30 people attacked gold mine to find gold, one shot dead by guards.
Muslims torch bars to demand tighter restrictions on alcohol sales.
Opposition party protests to demand the release of jailed leaders.
Demonstrators protested against lack of police action against witchcraft killings in which women had genitals sliced off by attackers. 2 killed when police opened fire to stop crowd from destroying property, 2 others killed in stampede.
Around 30 people attacked gold mine to find gold, one shot dead by guards.
Demonstrators calling for independence of Zanzibar threw stones, police responded with water cannons and tear gas.
Uamsho supporters clashed with police after marching on police station after the arrest of one of their leaders.
Woman killed when police opened fire on demonstrators from opposition party Chadema.
Demonstrators, angry over rumor of 12-yr old Christian boy urinating on Koran, marched through city and attacked several churches. Ponda later arrested for sparking demonstrations. Date not explicitly stated, estimated here.
Clashes occurred between religious groups and police after Muslim leader Farid Adi went missing. Police used tear gas against crowds, one security officer killed Oct 17.
Demonstrators marched outside police headquarters and in streets to demand release of Muslim leader Shiekh Ponda Issa Ponda and others involved in earlier protests.
Demonstrators marched outside police headquarters and in streets to demand release of Muslim leader Shiekh Ponda Issa Ponda and others involved in earlier protests.
Witchcraft practitioners hacked off the hand of a young boy
Christian rioters burned down a Chinese factory and attempted to burn down a Mosque after rumors of animal sacrifice emerged
Bomb blast kills one in Church bombing. Past sectarian violence in the past
Bombers attack opposition party rally outside of a National Park
Herdsmen and farmers fight over land.
Villagers attempt to raid a gold mine
Two improvised bombs explode.
Representatives walk out on proceedings related to the union between Zanzibar and Tanzanian mainland.
A man and a woman kill an albino woman.
A bomb explodes near a mosque the same day as the Zanzibar International Film Festival.
An IED is thrown through a restaurant window.
Seven people accused of witchcraft are burned alive.
Three men murder two women they accuse of witchcraft.
Four people kidnap a 4-year old albino girl.
A local leader was attacked and beheaded for alleged adultery by a gang of men, who then cooked his body parts.
Mutilated body of albino toddler found one day after he was kidnapped from his mother's home.
Six year old boy loses hand in latest of vicious attacks against albinos.
Gunmen attacked police station in capital, killing 7 and injuring 4.
Attackers tried to hack the genitals off albino man, two days before elections.
1991 Burundi Government
University students protest presidential election claiming it was an ethnic census.
Civilians protest ethnic nature of the presidential election.
Hutu militia attack Tutsi soldiers and civilians.
Civilians protest military coup.
Opposition supporters demonstrate against the arrival of the United Nations.
General strike called by opposition parties to protest the military regime and ethnic violence.
Clashes between Hutu and Tutsi.
Clashes between Hutu and Tutsi.
Clashes between Hutu and Tutsi.
Clashes between Hutu and Tutsi.
Civilians riot when security forces attempt to disarm a neighborhood known for ethnic violence.
Clashes between armed gangs kill at least 20.
Refugees killed by unknown assailants.  Originally blamed on Hutu militants but may also have been led by the Tutsi army
Students protest demanding a return to tribal monarchy and police.  Businesses closed down in response to the demonstrations.
Students protest demanding the release of opposition leader who had organized the previous demonstration against the government.
1994 Burundi Government
Unknown assailants attack a Rwandan refugee camp.
Unknown assailant threw grenade into a crowded central market.
Supporters of Tutsi led main opposition party rally to demand resignation of the parliamentary speaker whom they accuse of inciting ethnic violence.
Stone throwing riot between Hutu and Tutsi youths as an act of revenge due to the deaths 10 Tutsi youths the previous week.
Clashes between Hutu and Tutsi.
Hutu civilians strike saying they fear the Tutsi authorities.
Grenade attack on a Roman Catholic Church, cause unknown but assumed to be ethnically based.
Tutsi opposition head a general strike demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Anatole Kanyenkiko for his role in the murders of Tutsis in 1993..
Grenade attack on a city bus, cause unknown be presumed to be related to the ongoing ethnic violence.
Grenade attack on a city bus, cause unknown be presumed to be related to the ongoing ethnic violence.
Grenade explosions and gunfire after the announcement of the replacement of the prime minister.
Tutsis attack Hutus.
Displaced people attack civilians after the murder of an accountant.
Tutsi extremists shot Mines and Energy Minster and one guard
Grenade explosions during the burial of assassinated Mines and Energy Minister.
Tutsi students protest demanding UN special envoy leave Burundi claiming it has sided with Hutu extremists.
Students demonstrate demanding justice for those killed in the massacre after the 1993 failed coup attempt and blaming the United States for meddling in domestic affairs.
Civilians peacefully protest the arrival of Rwandan Hutu refugees blamed for the Rwandan genocide.
Armed gunmen throw grenades into an open air market.
Unknown assailants attack civilians and government officials .
Women peacefully demonstrate against the ongoing ethnic conflict.
A gang attacks a town, killing both Tutsi and Hutu.
Unity for National Progress organized demonstration against international intervention in the ongoing ethnic conflict.
Workers for the civil service mutual insurance company strike over poor management.
Unknown assailants attack the governor of Cibitoke as he was traveling between Bujumbura and Cibitoke.
Unknown assailants attack the governor of Cibitoke as he was traveling between Bujumbura and Cibitoke.
Civil servants strike to show support for workers of the civil service mutual insurance company who have been on strike for a month over poor management.
Gunmen attack aid agency workers.
Aid agencies suspend all operations in response to the killings of Red Cross workers.
Unknown attackers threw grenades into Rwandan refugee camp housing Hutus.
Protesters demonstrate against the central government's request for international assistance and demand an end to the coalition government.
University students strike demanding the removal of President Ntibantunganya.
Tutsi protest the massacres of Tutsi refugees in Burundi.
Civilians follow a strike call by opposition leader Jean-Baptiste Bagaza to protest the killing of Tutsi refugees.
Mourners at the funeral for Tutsi refugees attacked Hutu President Ntibantunganya.
Civilians march to demonstrate support for the newly installed military government.
Refugees briefly riot over increased attempts to return them to Rwanda.
Unknown assailants attack returning refugees from Zaire.
Unknown assailants attack vehicles and set fire to homes.
Supporters of former president Bagaza fired shots into the air as news of Bagaza's arrest spread.
University students strike to demand payment of grants owed to them.
Unknown assailants throw grenades into a crowded market.
University employees strike demanding increase in pay.
Unknown armed groups attack several villages in the Rutana district, killing civilians burning down homes and stealing livestock.
Civilians strike over tax increase on beer, fuel and sugar.
Tutsi extremist parties organize a rally against peace talks claiming Hutu rebels should be tried for genocide not allowed into the government through power sharing agreements.
Uniformed men kill civilians who refused to leave their village and enter a government regroupment camp.
Trade unions call for a general strike to protest the government's failure to end the ethnic conflict and failing economic conditions.
Unknown assailants throw grenades.
Students boycott classes to protest the government's inability to end the civil war.
Students protest over changes in the school schedule.
An armed band attempting to steal money attacks a town.
Tutsi extremists protest the dissolution of the army.
University students strike over exam schedules.
Cattle rustlers invade a commune and steal cattle.
Radical Tutsi's demonstrate against the Arusha peace accord.
High school students demonstrate demanding payment for cleaning up the city.
Secondary school teachers strike demanding increased pay and better working conditions.
Public school students storm the classrooms of private school students.
Tutsi youth attempt to set up road blocks and let off grenades.
Moped taxi drivers protest a ban on their profession.
Protesters demonstrate against the presence of South African troops.
Members of the judicial branch strike demanding better pay and greater independence.
Bicycle taxi drivers demonstrate against a ban preventing their operation.
University students strike when police attempt to stop initiation rites for first-year classmates.
School teachers strike demanding pay increases.
Peasants stage a sit-in to demand the government return land that was seized from them.
Members of the Forceful Self-Defence-Amasekanya protest the presence of South Africa Deputy President Zuma, claiming he is protecting perpetrators of genocide.
Petroleum companies strike to pressure the government to reduce taxes on fuel.
Prisoners and rebels take control of two prisons demanding the release of prisoners as agreed in the peace agreement.
Congolese Tutsi protest outside the DRC embassy against the killing of other Congolese Tutsi.
Civilians protest sexual assault against women that has occurred during the civil war.
Motorcycle taxi drivers chased down suspected thieves and burn them to death.
Voters experience violence as they attempt to vote.
University teachers strike demanding three years of pay arrears.
Hospital nurses strike demanding to be included in a program that provides bonuses to those who work in rural areas.
Multiple grenade attacks on civilians.
Lawyers strike demanding the release of a fellow lawyer detained for alleged involvement in coup plot and to demand less interference from the government.
Journalists strike demanding better pay and work conditions.
FNL rebels attack police officers.
President Nkurunziza is accused of attempting to assassinate opposition politicians critical of his policies.
Unknown assailants target opposition party leaders in a meticulously planned series of attacks.  No one is killed.
Rival factions of the FNL clash over leadership of the rebel organization.
Rebel factions clash.
Unknown gunmen kill three top members of Burundi's last active rebel group in an attack on a restaurant.
Rebel factions clash over a peace deal with the government.
Primary school teachers strike demanding promised bonuses, increased pay and government housing.
Students protest poor food in their school.
Chinese traders demonstrate demanding increased security.
Government workers strike demanding promised pay increases.  The strike was extended after arrests of union officials.
Unknown rebels open fire on French aid workers.
Three suspects throw a grenade into a house, killing a family.  Motive is unclear.
2008 Burundi Government
Former UN employees protest and attack a UN mission vehicle demanding renewal of contracts or pay-offs.
Prisoners riot demanding the government uphold terms of sentences allowing for conditional release after 25% of the term has been served and additional prisoners rights.
Former child soldiers being held in a demobilization camp riot claiming the government has not provided them with anything other than a bar of soap.
Students protest demanding increase grants from the government and UNESCO.
Unknown attackers hurl a grenade into a high school graduation party.
Attackers throw grenades into a wedding.
Attackers throw grenades into a home.
Doctors strike demanding pay increases.
Civilians gather to protest the trial of opposition party leader Alexis Sindujije.
Doctors strike demanding pay increases.
Unknown attackers throw a grenade into a family.
Former child soldiers being held in a demobilization camp riot demanding better living conditions.
Attackers hurl a grenade into a home.
Attackers throw a grenade into a home.
Attackers hurl a grenade into a home.
Teachers strike demanding pay increases.
Nurses strike demanding pay increases.
Judges strike protesting the suspension of three colleagues and demanding independence.
Unknown assailants sent off a grenade in the central market.
An ex-rebel assassinates a top Burundian opposition official.
Ex-rebels throw grenades into the houses of citizens.
A family suspected of witchcraft is killed.
Teachers strike over non-payment of salaries.
Prisoners riot and attack guards after a mass pardon from the president.
Former rebels protest outside offices responsible for disarming and clash with police.
Schoolchildren protest an ongoing strike by teachers.
Citizens protest alleged election fraud and clash with police.
An alleged policeman kills an opposition leader with a grenade.
Former rebels attack citizens with grenades and torch offices of the ruling party, resulting in continued clashes with police.
Former rebels kill two members of the ruling party.
Former rebels ambush police repeatedly.
Former rebels ambush police repeatedly.
Former rebels attack police.
Former rebels attack citizens and clash with police.
Former rebels kill an opposition official.
Soldiers ambush former rebels in continuing violence.
Former rebels kill civilians who had informed police they were hiding on their property.
A grenade is exploded in the capital as revelers usher in the new year.
Police kill several people, including members of the opposition FLN in a wave of alleged extra-judicial killings.
Police kill several people, including members of the opposition FLN in a wave of alleged extra-judicial killings.
Police kill several people, including members of the opposition FLN in a wave of alleged extra-judicial killings.
FLN gunmen stage a reprisal for the recent killing of several of its members by presidential police.  The gunmen attack a bar, killing three ruling party members.
Activists stage a demonstration to demand justice for an assassinated anti-corruption activist.  The police block the protest and make several arrests.
Three members of the former rebel FLN are killed by 'armed bandits,' a government term for the perpetrators of a recent wave of political killings.
Gunmen kill a local ruling party official in an overnight attack on his home.
About 100 journalists march to protest the jailing of a colleague.
Dozens of armed men open fire on a restaurant next to the local office of the ruling party, killing 4.
Gunmen wearing police uniforms attack a minibus, rob the passengers, and become involved in a 30 minute gun battle with police.
Gunmen ambush and rob a taxi, becoming involved in a battle with police.
Armed men from the DRC (suspected raiders belonging to the FLN rebel group) burst into a pub and kill 39 people.
Armed men attack a village.  Police and soldiers track them down, triggering a massive firefight.
Gunmen attack and rob a convent, killing an Italian volunteer and a Croatian nun.
Rights Activist Leonard Hakizimana was killed outside his home by unknown attackers.
A gang attacked a government office, killing two police officers.
The Collective Against the High Cost of Living asked Burundians not to buy beer or any other product from Brarudi, thelargely government owned company.  The company raised its prices to pass taxes along to its consumers
A newly formed faction of FNL, Burundi's last active rebel group, fired rockets at a military base.  They were quickly driven off.
Gunmen from the new Murundi People's front entered the town of Buganda, then Murwi, clashing with security forces.  9 of the gunmen were reported dead, but the Murundi People's Front claimed the government report was false and that 17 soldiers were wounded with rebels suffering minimal losses.
Gunmen from the new Murundi People's front entered the town of Buganda, then Murwi, clashing with security forces.  9 of the gunmen were reported dead, but the Murundi People's Front claimed the government report was false and that 17 soldiers were wounded with rebels suffering minimal losses.
Crowds protested outside a courthouse during the appeals hearing for journalist Hassan Ruvakuki.  Ruvakuki had been convicted of terrorism and given a life sentence, which he was appealing.
Hundreds of members of a Catholic sect, armed with clubs and stones, clashed with police as they tried to gather on a hilltop that is a place of pilgrimage
A journalist was beaten and shot in the arm by a police officer after he saw the officer extorting money from men carrying fruit
Two people were killed when a bus was ambushed by 15 members of the National Liberation Forces
Over a thousand youths rioted as police tried to evict a Tutsi family from their house in order to give it back to a Hutu family
Gunmen killed three people and seriously wounded two others when they opened fire in a crowded bar and exploded a grenade
Rioting broke out in Mpimba prison sparked by disciplinary measures taken against 13 prisoners who had rioted in July
Six inmates charged with keeping order were stabbed and beaten with iron bars by fellow inmates and were seriously injured
Fighters from an armed splinter group attacked a Burundian army position killing 5.
group jog to the center of the capital where they were dispersed by riot police. After taking refuge in the parties building 2 police were taken hostage before police stormed the building.
FNL rebel group attacks two army bases killing 12 Burundian soldiers.
A top pro-government political leader in the Uprona party is wounded in a grenade attack on his house perpetrated by two young men.
Hundreds of opposition protesters try to enter the Uprona headquarters before briefly demonstrating in the surrounding streets.
The bodies of around 40 murdered individuals are found in lake Rweru over the course of several weeks.
Three Italian nuns were raped and murdered in their convent.
FNL rebels attack a military outpost killing 6.
Burundian Security Forces clash with around 200 members of an unidentified armed group who crossed the border from the DRC leaving at least 105 dead.
Troops and Imbonerakure ruling party's youth wing executed at least 47 rebels who surrendered during a 5-day battle with the troops.
Five unknown gunmen executed 3 CNDD-FDD ruling party activists at a bar before torching a CNDD-FDD's office. 
150 journalists and civil rights activists demonstrated to demand the release of a radio station boss - Bob Rugurika - accused of complicity in the murder of three Italian nuns.
Students went on strike to protest a delay in the payment of their grants and high costs of living.
Thousands celebrated the bail out and release of an independent radio station director - Bob Rugurika and accussed the governemnt of his detention.
Thousands took part in a government-backed rally "for peace", where speakers took aim at the opposition, civil groups and the media, accusing them of leading the country towards war.
Annonciate Haberisoni - wife of opposition leader Agathon Rwasa - was shot and wounded by an unidentified gunman at a hair salon.
A thousand of opposition activists gathered to protest the president's third term reelection bid, but were dispearsed by police with tear gas; 65 protesters were arrested.
Ten people were killed during a week-long protest turned into a violent riot against president's third term candidacy in an upcoming presidential election. Multiple people were killed by riot police, as well as during granade attacks. 600 people were arrested and dozens were wounded in continued violence across the capital. Police and troops were deployed to restore order with the army declaring their neutrality, while the opposition vowed more protests until the president removes his candidacy from the presidential race.
Eight people were killed in renewed clashes between opposition supporters, government supporters and police, sparked by president's reelection bid. The renewed period of violent protests took place after a weekend-long truce.
200 women attampted to march to the Inedependence Square in protest of president's third term reelection bid, but were blocked by police.
Following a one-day truce, riots resumed in the capitol, as police attempted to remove opposition barricades, who protested president's third term reelection bid. Two protesters were shot by police. 
Thousands of people marched in the capital to protest president's third term reelection bid as police looked on.
Thousands of people marched on the state radio and tv complex after an attempted coup attempt by General Godefroid Niyombare, chanting anti-government slogans and celebrating the attempted coup, but were dispersed by tear gas and shots fired in the air.
General Godefroid Niyombare staged a coup against the president amid weeks of rioting and protest due to president's bid for a third term in office. Coup leaders were arrested by troops loyal to the president. 
Loyalist troops stormed an emergency ward of a hospital where soldiers loyal to the coup leaders were receiving treatment. One soldier was killed as a result of a gun battle. 
Two fractions of the army fought over control of the state television and radio complex in the capital following a coup attempt by General Godefroid Niyombare. Loyalist soldiers remained in control.
Multiple independent media broadcasters were attacked by pro-president police and troop forces, as governemnt accused them of fomenting riots and protests in the capitol.
Protesters opposing the president took to the streets following the failure of a coup to oust him; police were deployed to disperse the protesters.
Three people were wounded in an attack by the Imbonerakure on suspected opposition supporters on the outskirts of the capital. 
Protests resumed in the capital after a failed coup attempt and inta-army fighting to demand that the president does not run for a third term in office. Police was deployed and fired bullets, tear gas, and grenades to disperse protesters. Multiple people were wounded and two people were shot dead. 
A soldier was shot dead by a policeman during unrest following a failed coup attempt. The soldier was shot when protesting repressive force used by the police to quash the protest.
protesters burnt election materials and destroyed voting booths and ballot boxes.
Unknown attackers threw a grenade into a crowd, killing three and injuring many during an opposition protest against the president's third term reelection bid.
Unknown attackers killed Zedi Feruzi, the head of the Union for Peace and Development (UPD) opposition party, and an accompanying police officer.
One protestor, demanding the resignation of the president, was shot dead by police in Muyange.
After a short truce, riots resumed in the capital as people demanded that the president does not run for a third term in office and resigns. At least three people were killed by the police and many were wounded. 
One protestor was shot dead by police in Butagazwa during a protest against president's third term reelection bid.
Protests against the presdent resumed in the capitol, but were dispearsed by tear gas and live rounds by the police. At least one man was killed.
Thousands demonstrated against the president's third term in office in president's home province - Ngozi.
Police shot dead a protestor as a couple hundred people attempted to gather in the capital to protest president's third term reelection bid.
Unknown arsonists burnt down the home of the vice president of the ruling CNDD-FDD party in the municipality of Mugongomanga after he allegedly called the police on anti-presidental protests earlier that week.
Small protests were broken up by police when protesters attempted to gather in opposition to president's third term reelection bid.
A grenade exploded in the centre of the capital, wounding 3 people.
11 police officers were wounded by a string of grenade attacks by unknown attackers on police posts and police vehicles.
Four coordinated overnight grenade attacks throughout the country killed 4 and injured 30 to 41 people, including two policemen. 3 suspects were arrested.
Four coordinated overnight grenade attacks throughout the country killed 4 and injured 30 to 41 people, including two policemen. 3 suspects were arrested.
Four coordinated overnight grenade attacks throughout the country killed 4 and injured 30 to 41 people, including two policemen. 3 suspects were arrested.
Four coordinated overnight grenade attacks throughout the country killed 4 and injured 30 to 41 people, including two policemen. 3 suspects were arrested.
Two grenade attacks injured at least 8 people.
Youth set fire to election materials and hurled grenades in the Ntega district. Soldiers fired shots to chase attackers away.
Two people were killed in a police crackdown on areas seen as hosting anti-government protesters.
One person was killed in a grenade attack.
Unknown attackers shot at and threw grenades at several polling sations the night before and on the day of the parliamentary election. The exact number of attacks is unknown.
Six people, including one police officer, were killed in a clash between protesters and police, as it was carrying out house-to-house searches for guns. According to a police statement, 5 civilians killed were members of an "armed group", who posessed rifles and grenades.
Seven civilians were wounded in a grenade attack on a police patrol.
Soldiers attacked rebels near the border with Rwanda and killed 12 gunmen, arresting 170.
At least one person was shot dead during a night of grenade attacks and gunfire, as police responded to the attackers.
Two protesters were wounded when police opened fire on protesters opposed to president's third term in office. 
Unknown attackers attacked policemen, who fired back the night before the presidential election. At least one policeman and one civilian died.
Imbonerakure ruling party youth wing killed protest leader Emmanuel Ndereyimana, a member of Rwasa's FNL political group.
A grenade attack on a house of an official from ruling CNDD-FDD party injured 4 people.
Journalist Esdras Ndikumana was arrested by government security forces and beaten at the scene of top general assasination.
A top Burundian general and right-hand man to President Pierre Nkurunziza was killed in a rocket attack on his car.
A human rights activist Pierre-Claver Mbonimpa was shot and injured on his way home from work by unknown attackers.
Two people were killed in a shootout after a grenade was thrown at a police patrol, injuring one officer.
Colonel Jean Bikomagu, a key figure in the former Tutsi-dominated army, was killed in his car by unidentified assailants near his home.
Police raided the Musaga district of the capital, seizing guns. 
Gumen shot four people dead at a bar, who were suspected to be police informers in an opposition neighbourhood.
Four people died in renewed clashes between the opposition and the police. The parties blamed each other for the violence.
Gunmen attacked a military post in Gihanga, one gunman was killed.
Patrice Gahungu, spokesman of the Union for Peace and Democracy, was killed by unknown attackers.
An unknown gunman was shot dead when he attampted to attack a military post.
Soldiers attempted an assasination of the army chief - General Prime Niyongabo, but failed. 7 people died in a following clash. 
At least a dozen people were killed in renewed clashes between anti-government protesters and the police.
A Burundian journalist, his wife and their two children, as well at least 2 other civilians were shot dead by security forces, according to civilian witnesses. 
Three gunmen and a policeman were killed in clashes in Mwanro dstrict.
At least 3 people were killed and 15 wounded in clashes between gunmen and security forces.
Seven gunmen were killed in battles with security forces in Nyarusange.
At least one person died when police fired at a funeral bus, targeting suspected attackers on a police post a week before. Witnesses reported 16 victims.
Eight gunmen were killed and 18 others were captured after clashes with police.
Son of human rights defender Pierre-Claver Mbonimpa was found dead a couple hours after his arrest.
Unknown gunmen, wearing police uniforms,  killed 9 people, including a UN employee, in an attack on a bar hours before a planned military security crackdown on the opposition.
Two people were killed by security forces during a crackdown on opposition strongholds in the capital in a search for weapons.
Seven people, including policemen and gunmen were killed and several others wounded in clashes, grenade and other attacks in the capital.
Insurgents took responsibility for a failed mortar attack on Burundi's presidential palace.
Four people died in a clash when police tried to arrest a gang allegedly plotting a grenade attack.
Four gunmen shot dead a policeman and a teacher in a bar in eastern Burundi.
A policeman and a civilian died in a grenade attack.
A bodyguard was killed when gunmen opened fire on the convoy of presidential advisor and top member of the ruling CNDD-FDD party, Zenon Ndaruvukanye. Two attackers were arrested.
Four people were killed in clashes following an attack on a senior army commander, who was wounded.
Gunmen attacked a bar, killing an army major, and wounding several people, including the husband of the senate's deputy speaker.
A policeman was killed and three wounded by attackers, who hurled grenades before opening fire on a police patrol.
Three people were wounded in a grenade attack.
Two people were killed and six wounded in a grenade blast.
Unknown gunmen dressed in police uniforms fired a rocket-propelled grenade at a police general's car, who escaped with others. Three attackers were killed.
Two gunmen were killed and 11 arrested in clashes with security forces after 100 gunmen entered the town of Burambi.
Men in police uniforms pulled five people from their houses in Cibitoke neighborhood and shot them dead, 2 more people were killed in Jabe and Bwiza neighborhoods.
Police shot 5 "insurgents" who threw grenades at a patrol.
Heavily-armed gunmen launched coordinated assaults on three army bases. 87 people were killed, including 8 soldiers.
At least 28 bodies were found on the streets following police raids on opposition neighborhoods hours after coordinated attacks by unknown gunmen on military bases.
Thousands of president's supporters protested African Union's plan to deploy peacekeepers to the country.
1990 Rwanda Government
Opposition parties organize mass demonstration against state monopolized media, intimidation of opposition and corruption.
Hutus attack Tutsi in ethnic clashes.
Hutus attack Tutsi in ethnic clashes.
Hutus attack Tutsi in ethnic clashes.
Youth wing of the National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development protest against opposition incitements to violence.  Demonstration turned violent when opposition supporters attacked demonstrators.
Taxi drivers protest over the killing of a colleague by other taxi drivers belonging to the Hutu majority.
Soldiers riot over the possibility of losing their jobs during demobilization at the end of the war.
Soldiers riot over the possibility of losing their jobs during demobilization at the end of the war.
Soldiers riot over the possibility of losing their jobs during demobilization at the end of the war.
Soldiers riot over the possibility of losing their jobs during demobilization at the end of the war.
Soldiers riot over the possibility of losing their jobs during demobilization at the end of the war.
Supporters of the MDR riot after police killed one of their members.
Members of the Coalition for the Defense of the Republic protest demanding the release of members arrested for participating in previous protests.
Clashes between opposition and ruling party members.
Opposition members demonstrate against the violence between government and opposition supporters and accuse the government of preventing peace with FPR.
Ruling party members demonstrate and riot over the peace agreement between the government and FRP, claiming the FRP received too many seats in the government.
Hutus attack Tutsi in ethnic clashes and in protest of the peace agreement between Tutsi rebels and the Hutu government.
Multiple bombings on civilian populations, no group has claimed responsibility.
Multiple bombings on civilian populations, no group has claimed responsibility.
Multiple bombings on civilian populations, no group has claimed responsibility.
clashes between opposition and ruling party members.
Refugees hold 26 Red Cross workers hostage over changes in the location in food distribution centers.
40 civilians killed in overnight attacks, the government is accusing FRP of the attacks but this is not confirmed.
Burundi soldiers attack Rwandan civilians, killing several and forcing several others across the border to Burundi.
Civilians demonstrate over killings of two civilians allegedly killed by former guerilla soldiers.
Opposition supporters demonstrate multiple times in protest of the new interim government that includes Tutsi rebels.
Demonstrators attempt to prevent people from attending a Democratic Republican Movement rally.
PSD members attack and kill CDR leader Martin Bucyana in revenge for the murder of Felicien Gatabazi, minister of public works and energy.  Clashes between the two parties occur due to the establishment of the interim government and ethnic viol
Violence breaks out after the assassination of President Habyarimana.
Rebel supporters protest French intervention in the civil war.
RPF members attack and kill civilians expected of helping Hutu government forces during the genocide that occurred earlier in the year.
Former government militia attack and kill civilians to discourage refugees from returning to Rwanda.
Refugees protest distribution of relief aid and living conditions.
Returning refugees are rounded up and killed.
RPF soldiers clash with civilian Hutu refugees attempting to force them to leave camps.
Former government militia attack and kill civilians to discourage refugees from returning to Rwanda.
Hutu extremists attack refugees that refuse to move to Tanzania.
Violence erupts in refugee camp.
Former Rwandan soldiers attack a fishing village, killing six.
Former Rwandan soldiers attack members of the UN mission to Rwanda.
Gunmen kill a Rwandan governor.
Rwandans gather on the anniversary of the beginning of the genocide that began last year to demand justice and bury those killed in the massacre.
Protesters demonstrate over the lack of international assistance during the genocide, the length of time it has taken to arrest perpetrators of violence and to demand the UN leave Rwanda.
Protesters demonstrate over France's supposed support of the Habyarimana regime.
Hutu refugees resist the RPA when the arrive to close down refugee camps.
Tutsi soldiers attack a refugee camp, killing thousands.
Hutu refugees returning to their village were stoned and beaten to death in revenge killings.
Civilians demonstrate against foreign presence in the country and the interpretation of events at Kibeho.
Hutu militia men set up barricades and attack the patrolling RPA.  Several militia men, soldiers and civilians were killed in the clashes.
Former soldiers attack Rwandan citizens close to the Zairean border in three separate attacks.
Former soldiers attack Rwandan citizens close to the Zairean border in three separate attacks.
Former Rwandan soldiers attack a prison, killing a police officer and emptying the prison.
Armed men attack villages on the border with Zaire.
Armed men attack villages on the border with Zaire.
Armed men attack a health clinic and a school, killing several.
Soldiers attack war crimes investigators, mistaking them for UN representatives.
Hutu exiles attack civilians.
Hutu militia attack civilians and government forces.
Women demonstrate calling attention to the inability of UN peacekeepers to prevent genocide or protect refugees.
Hutu extremists attack jails and local offices.
Shopkeepers strike in protest of new tax of 3% of monthly sales.
Hutu extremists attack a prison in order to free its inmates.
Cross-border shelling by Zairean artillery injures three Rwandan soldiers.
Hutu militants attack and loot a hospital for medical supplies.
Hutu militants attack civilians.
Hutu militants attack civilians.
Rwandan army attack civilians.
Rwandan army attack civilians.
Clashes between Interahamwe Hutu militants and the Rwanda Patriotic Army.
Demonstrators demand to know why genocide participants haven't been tried and where money has been spent already.
1997 Rwanda Government
Unknown assailants attacked a Red Cross vehicle and killed those traveling inside.
Unknown assailants attack a school.
Demonstrators protest at the release of prisoners accused of being involved in the 1994 genocide.
Released prisoners were killed by unknown assailants in what is assumed to be revenge attacks for 1994 genocide.
Civilians demonstrate against the continued violence and killings in Rwanda.
English-speaking students protest over learning in French.
Genocide survivors protest over the UN tribunal decision to release a key suspect on a technicality.
Genocide survivors protest claiming UN tribunal staff collaborate with the perpetrators of genocide and delaying trials.
Supporters of Paul Kagame demonstrate support for the President-elect.
Rwandan rebels hiding out in the DRC launch rockets across the border.
Civilians demonstrate against a French judge's decision to issue arrest warrants for aides to Pres. Kagame for their alleged role in the plane crash of Pres. Habyarimana.
Civilians protest the arrest of a senior official in Germany
2009 Rwanda Government
Unknown attackers attack opposition candidates and their assisatants.
Unknown bombers throw grenades in heavily populated areas.
Unknown bombers throw grenades in two separate incidents, killing one and wounding several.
Unknown attackers kill a journalist critical of the government.
Opposition parties demonstrate against fraud in the electoral commission.  Police disperse.
Unknown attackers kill the leader of an unregistered opposition group.
Unknown bombers throw a grenade into a bus station, wounding several right after an election.
A grenade explodes near a busy taxi park.
Unknown attacker throw a grenade, injuring 10.
A grenade attack occurs in a market.
Grenade blast killed 2 people and wounded others.
Grenade exploded on road on edge of bus park where vendors were selling phone cards, 10 wounded.
Explosion was detonated at bus park, killing one and wounding others.
Six people were injured in two simultaneous grenade blasts, suspects arrested.
DR Congo army bombed area around airport and fired anti-aircraft missiles at Mount Rubavu, killing 2 civilians.
protesters demonstrated against the acquital of two leaders of the 1994 genocide by the ICTR
Unknown suspects tossed a grenade into a marketplace in Kigali
DRC fired a mortor into Rwanda
DRC fired a mortor into Rwanda
Unknown bombers fired rockets into a Rwandan town from the DRC
Unknown bombers threw two grenades into a Kigali Market in the lead up to legislative elections
Suspected anti-government rebels launch grenades at a bus stop.
A man accuses the government of torturing him for a month after he is arrested for supposedly plotting attacks against the state.
University students hold a protest march against the BBC for a documentary about the 1994 genocide.
Hundreds protested outside the British embassy to condemn the arrest of General Karenzi Karake in London and his possible extradition to Spain.
1986 Somalia Government
President Siad Barre's personal guard fires on a crowd in a soccer stadium when they jeer him.
Security forces fire on Muslims protesting the arrest of their religious leaders.  450 die.
Soldiers round up 48 men and boys and then rob and shoot them.  One survives.
300,000 people protest against the arrest of civic leaders charged with sedition.
Shootout between security forces and armed gangs in a shantytown.
Battles fought after armed attackers break into a warehouse and steal 4000 dollars worth of Somali shillings.  Battles start when soldiers try to confiscate weapons from opponents near the presidential palace.
Relief plans are looted at the airport.
protesters organized by gunmen loyal to USC warlord Mohammed Farah Aidid demonstrate against foreign guards protecting food shipments.
1000 supporters of Mohammed Farah Aidid protest against a visit by the UN Secretary General.  The protest turns violent when the crowd begins throwing rocks.
200 protesters march to protest the killing of aid worker Sean Devereux.
protesters demonstrate against presence of foreigners.  Shots are fires and stones are hurled at cars.
protesters of the Jijele clan claim they have been mistreated in peace talks.  The protest turns violent.  Canadian troops open fire, killing one.
Supporters of rival warlords protest and riot against each other.
A crowd of Somalis stones an American convoy.
Prisoners riot over poor conditions and delayed justice.  Guards and wardens kill one.
Supporters of Aidid protest against the UN and the US.  Supporters of Ali Mahdi praise them.
Aidid stages a demonstration against UN airstrikes.
Aidid supporters protest UN and US airstrikes.
Supporters of Aidid protest against the US.
Supporters of Aidid hurl rocks at Pakistani UN peacekeepers.
2000 Aidid supporters protest for peace.
Somali crowds protest a visit by UN Secretary General.
An unknown gunmen attacks a Red Cross aid station.
protesters demonstrate against the presence of Indian peacekeepers.  The Indians open fire after the crowd turns violent and starts throwing rocks and knives.
Several thousand protesters demonstrate against the US as 500 US troops are pulled out of the country.
A crowd gathers after they hear rumors that UN jobs are available.  They grow restless when jobs fail to materialize.  UN forces disperse with tear gas.
Protest against UN peacekeepers turns violent.  UN opens fire, kills 2.
Unknown attackers ambush UN peacekeepers
Demonstration against UN presence.  In a separate protest, former regime soldiers demonstrate to demand that the UN furnish them with weapons.
Fighting erupts between members of clan over relief supplies.
Unknown clans battle.
Unknown attackers kill five Nepalese peacekeepers.
Habre Gedir tribesmen assault UN peacekeepers in a town seized from the Hawadles.
Habre Gedir tribesmen attack a peacekeeper convoy.
Gunmen kill three Indian doctors.
Unknown gunmen attack a UN patrol
A clash occurs between forces of the former leader of autonomous Somaliland and supporters of the self-declared government.
Rival clans battle for control of the sea port.
Somali employees of the UN protest over back pay by blocking the airport.  Pakistani peacekeepers break up the protest.
100 protesters demonstrate against the UN over overtime and termination pay.
Rival clans battle.
Militias loyal to the  self-declared Somaliland president Mohamed Egal clash with those of Abdurahman Tuur.
The SNA militia of Mohamed Farah Aidid clash disperse traders from a market where looted goods are sold.
Rival clans battle
Gunmen attack a WFP food convoy.
12 foreign fishermen are captured by Aidid's faction and held hostage after being caught fishing in the warlord's waters.  The prisoners stage a hunger strike.
Gunmen of a warring sub-clan round up and execute 6 imams in retaliation for rapes committed the week prior.  The article makes clear that the reason for the imams being singled out is unknown.
Ethiopians demonstrate at IRC office to demand repatriation.  Red Cross guards disperse the demonstrators
Bandits attack refugees, stealing food, a truck, and other belonginings.
Clan militias opposed to Mohamed Farrah Aidid attack his forces.
Gunmen attack Italian doctors.
Ethnic clans clash.
Clans wage war.
A battle occurs between USC militia forces of Mohamed Aidid and the forces of the self-proclaimed Somaliland republic.
A battle occurs between USC militia forces of Mohamed Aidid and the forces of the self-proclaimed Somaliland republic.
Clans battle.
Thousands of people march through Mogadishu in remembrance of a peace campaigner killed by Aidid's forces.
Gunmen abduct five UN aid workers.
Hostage aid workers are freed after their kidnappers clash with armed villagers.  No other information on the kidnapping is available.
Militia forces clash.
Militia forces clash.
Militia forces clash.
Clan and ethnic militias clash.
Supporters of Somali warlord take to the streets to celebrate the 'victory' over UN peacekeepers.
Bandits attack a WFP convoy.
Supporters of Somali warlord Ali Mahdi protest Aidid's aggression and demand all out war after a battle kills several civilians.
Rival clans battle following an indiscriminate attack on Marjerten businesses.
Clan militia attacks a convoy belonging to an NGO.  They seize weapons and hold hostages.
Guards of merchants battle in the streets over claims of extortion.
Ongoing militia war between factions results in a ceasefire violation.
Ongoing militia war between factions results in a ceasefire violation.
Ali Mahdi's militia attacks a village of Sufis after they refuse to lend the faction machine guns in the village arsenal.
Rival clans battle following an indiscriminate attack on Marjerten businesses.
Rival warlords clash.   Triggered by an indiscriminate attack on a bus.
Rival warlords clash.   Triggered by an indiscriminate attack on a bus.
Unknown gunmen kill a doctor.
Habr Jeclo militia open fire on civilians after they are harassed by rival ethnic militias.
Militiamen who work for the UN World Food Programme take to the streets to protest non-payment of wages.
Strike caused by workers' differences.
Rival ethnic militias clash.
Rival ethnic militias clash.
Rival ethnic militias clash.
Clash over unknown causes.
Alleged massacre by Aidid militiamen against rival clans.
Alleged massacre by Aidid militiamen against rival clans.
Aidid forces clash with RRA.
Gunmen abduct UN aid workers.
Gunmen briefly take aid workers hostage.
3 people, including a rich businessman, are shot dead in an intra-clan dispute.
Hundreds of Somalis march against Italy to protest the arrest of a Somali national in Rome.
Intra-faction battle.  Clan members assassinate businessmen.
60,000 people demonstrate to show their support for a peace agreement between Somalia's warlords.
Sub-clans battle one another after a Suleiman businessman is killed.
Gunmen shoot at a food plane.
Al-Itihad Al-Islam seizes control of Elwak.
Rival clans battle.
Red Cross workers kidnapped and held hostage for 10 days.
Rival clans battle.
Ethnic clans clash.
Rival clans battle over unknown causes. Saad v Duduble in Afgoi, Elay v Baqolhore in Burhakaba
Rival clans battle over unknown causes. Saad v Duduble in Afgoi, Elay v Baqolhore in Burhakaba
French hostages are taken by gunmen in the Gulf of Aden.
Rival clans battle.
Militias clash for control of Baidoa.
Bandits attack civilians.
Rival factions battle.
Rival factions battle.
Rival factions battle.  Atto militia attack a World Food Program convey guarded by militiamen loyal to Aidid.
Clans wage war.
Clans wage war.
Rival clans battle.  Battle erupts over a jobs dispute at Swedish Church Relief.  Moalin-weyne accuse Galadle of depriving them of jobs
Militias clash for control of Baidoa.
Continuing conflict between RRA and Aidid.
Clans wage war.
Subclans wage war.
RRA fires rockets into a bus full of civilians.
Gunmen fire rockets into buses full of civilians.
Bandits attack aid workers.
Muse Sudi attempts to extort local merchants with heavy taxes.  The merchants fight back.  12 die.
Clash between the Habr Gedir clan and the Joint Islamic Courts against the Murursade and Abgal clans.
An ethnic militia attempts to assassinate Hussein Aidid.
Subclans wage war.
Violence within and between sub-clans  in Mogadishu, Bakara, and Beletwein.
Unspecified militias wage war.
Bandits attack civilians in a car.
Mid-afternoon violence between rival militias (not named).
RRA seizes Baidoa.
Hussein Aidid's milita retakes Baidoa from the RRA.
Intra-faction violence.
Intense fighting occurs between Aidid militiamen and the RRA.
Hussein Aidid militia and the RRA battle again for control of Baidoa.
A three clan alliance wrests Kismayu from a rival clan.
Hundreds of demonstrators, mostly supporters of Aidid, protest against Ethiopian intervention in Somalia.
Somalis begin protesting and then burst into a riot over a flood of imported shillings that have devalued their currency.  They try to break into businesses where the new money is kept.  Guards open fire.  1 dies.
A commander of the Al-Itihad Al-Islamia group is shot dead - AIAI seeks to merge the ethnic Somali Muslim region of Ogaden in Ethiopia with Somalia.
A Marjeten militia (JVA) takes a town from a rival militia.
Fighting between clans and militias.
Fighting between clans and militias.
Tribal militia attacks bandits demanding extortion terrorizing travelers.
Fighting within the Marehan clan leads to 2 deaths.
Forces loyal to Mohammed Saeed Hirsi take a village from the Juba Valley Alliance.
Gunmen attack a bus, carrying out retribution for an earlier incident in which some other gunmen stole a vehicle.
Intra-faction violence sparked by robbery incident.
Militia factions of the Somali National Front clash over control of a town.
Inter-clan violence
Inter-clan violence
Gunmen kill a UNICEF doctor.
More than 5000 people march to protest the killing of a UNICEF doctor.
More than 5000 people march to protest the killing of a UNICEF doctor.
More than 5000 people march to protest the killing of a UNICEF doctor.
Clan militias clash.
Rival Bantu clans fight.
Gunmen seal off a school to demand jobs there.
Ethnic militias clash.
A lorry's tire explodes, prompting rival militias to start shooting at each other.
Gunmen attack a Food Program convoy.  The raid triggers violence between Abgal tribe members. 13 killed.
Fighting erupts when cattle owned by Odejen trample crops owned by Bantus.  11 die.
Fighting erupts when cattle owned by Odejen trample crops owned by Bantus.  11 die.
Fighting erupts when cattle owned by Odejen trample crops owned by Bantus.  11 die.
Unknown gunmen attack a lorry carrying Abgal clansmen.
A land dispute triggers a shootout between subclans.
Guards of competing cinemas battle.  4 killed.
Gunmen kill civilians at road checkpoints in two separate incidents.
Gunmen kill a CARE engineer.
Fighting between sub-clans.  Fighting attributed to tax on commercial items imposed by the Rahanwein Resistance Army.
Sub-clans battle.
Armed robbers open fire indiscriminately in a market.
The food convoy is attacked three times in as many days by a sub-clan angered that it was cut out of the convoy's security contract.
Bandits loot a British aid agency.
RRA stages a campaign, attacking a number of villages.
RRA stages a campaign, attacking a number of villages.
RRA stages a campaign, attacking a number of villages.
RRA stages a campaign, attacking a number of villages.
Clan battle.  RRA and Islamic Court battle for control of local towns, with some involvement by another sub-clan.
Clan battle.  RRA and Islamic Court battle for control of local towns, with some involvement by another sub-clan.
Clan battle
Sub-clans battle.
Sub-clans battle.
Sub-clans battle.
Ethnic militias clash.
Sub-clans battle.
Subclans battle over land dispute.
Subclans battle over land dispute.
Hundreds of demonstrators organized by the RRA demonstrate against a peace plan proposed by Djibouti's president.
Subclans battle over cattle theft disputes.  Several ceasefires are attempted, but they are consistently broken.
Subclans battle.
Subclans battle.
Subclans battle.  Garre retaliate for the killing of a family member by rival clan.
Subclans battle in a cattle market.
Nationwide protests against perceived Egyptian involvement in frustrating Djibouti peace talks.
Nationwide protests against perceived Egyptian involvement in frustrating Djibouti peace talks.
Nationwide protests against perceived Egyptian involvement in frustrating Djibouti peace talks.
Nationwide protests against perceived Egyptian involvement in frustrating Djibouti peace talks.
Nationwide protests against perceived Egyptian involvement in frustrating Djibouti peace talks.
Nationwide protests against perceived Egyptian involvement in frustrating Djibouti peace talks.
Unknown gunmen kidnap European aid workers employed by an NGO.
Subclans battle.
Tens of thousands of Somalis greet the newly inaugurated president as he arrives in the capital.
protesters in autonomous Somaliland demonstrate against the election of a new president of Somalia as a result of peace talks in Djibouti.  They burn Somali and Djibouti flags.
Subclan violence.  Violence believed to be over an ambush of a bus in which 20 people were killed.
Subclan violence.  Violence believed to be over an ambush of a bus in which 20 people were killed.
Subclan violence.  Violence believed to be over an ambush of a bus in which 20 people were killed.
Militant factions battle.
Militant factions battle.
Gunmen attack a bus and kill Abgals.
Gunmen throw a grenade into a shelter.
Somali member of parliament is assassinated.
Gunmen open fire on one of Somalia's MPs, resulting in 7 deaths.
Somali warlord attacks militia supporters of Somalia's new president.
Factions of the Rahanwein Resistance Army clash over the Somali peace settlement, attack transitional government figures.
Factions of the Rahanwein Resistance Army clash over the Somali peace settlement, attack transitional government figures.
Clans battle over cattle and grazing rights.
Thousands of Somalis demonstrate against Ethiopian occupation of parts of the country.
Demonstrators support new Transitional government and oppose Ethiopian occupation.  Ethiopian troops open fire and kill 5.
Militias battle over control of an airport.
Demonstration over local currency depreciation turns violent.  Demonstrators and local police battle.
Thousands demonstrate against an oil exploration deal between the Transitional government and TatalFinaElf.
Hundreds demonstrate in favor of Transitional Govt. call to reopen the port, which is controlled by a rival warlord.
Unknown militia exchange fire.  6 die.
Hundreds protest Ethiopia's involvement in Somali civil war.
Gunmen attack a hotel housing the transitional prime minister and other members of parliament.
Factional fighters abduct 11 workers for UNICEF, WHO, and MSF in a bid to challenge the legitimacy of the new transitional government.
30,000 school children strike over inflation.
Militias battle over money and food.
2001 Somalia Government
Bus blast kills 20.
Sub clans battle.
Rival warlord challenges for control of the local Puntland government.
Rival warlord challenges for control of the local Puntland government.
Demonstrators protest in favor of local Somaliland government and denounce Somalia's Transitional govt.  Occurs in Barao and several other towns.
Clan gunmen seek revenge for the murder of a fellow clansman.  They open fire on a movie theater, wounding 10.
Factional clash between claimants to the presidency of the self-declared state of Puntland.
Clan battle.
300 Somalis denounce the US.
Demonstration turns into a violent riot when traders refuse to accept a suspect banknote.  Guards open fire on the rampaging mobs, killing 10.
Hundreds take to the streets to protest US military strikes in Afghanistan.
Warlord who lost Puntland's election attack the government and try to oust the new leader.
Subclans battle.
Subclans battle.
3000 militiamen training to be police abandon their training camps and come looting to Mogadishu, setting off a wave of violence.
Intra-faction battle.
Subclans battle over land dispute.
Subclans battle when cattle destroy crops.
Subclans battle when cattle destroy crops.
Subclans battle when cattle destroy crops.
Unknown gunmen explode a grenade in the home of interim prime minister Hassan Abshir Farah.
Factions battle.
Battle between civic leader Ibrahim Artan Isamai and president Jama Ali Jama.
occurs between police and civilians, resulting in a gun fight.
Battle between factions.
Tends of thousands demonstrate against Somalia.  The president speaks to them, condemning that country.
Battle between factions for control of Puntland.
Militia forces attack the hom of the interior minister.
Battle between transitional govt. and rival faction (non-civil war).
Battle between factions of the RRA, the leader of whom is the regional president.
Sub clan militias clash.
Battle between factions.
Battle between factions for control of Puntland.
Battle between factions for control of Puntland.
Battle between factions of the RRA, the leader of whom is the regional president.
Sub clan militias clash.
Factions of the Rahanwein Resistance Army clash.
Battle between factions of the SNF.
Gunmen fire on a bus full of students.
Battle between factions for control of Puntland.
Battle between factions for control of Puntland.
Gunmen ransack an NGO office, stealing computers and papers containing evidence of human rights abuse.
Gunmen open fire on a bus.
At least 50 people are killed in several incidents of faction fighting since a round of peace talks opened in Kenya on 2/25.  No other information is available.
Bandits kill and rob nine people.
Unknown factions battle in a remote village.
Subclan militias clash.
Three nationwide incidents of violence leave 9 dead.
Hundreds of protesters in Somaliland protest against the US invasion of Iraq.
Various incidents involving roaming gunmen terrorizing civilians.  2 die in a gun battle.
Peace activists hold a rally to call on the warring factions to settle their disputes peacefully.
Clan fighting erupts after a member of the Marhen clan is killed.
Clan fighting erupts after a member of the Marhen clan is killed.
Fighting erupts between rival militia.
Local militias abduct and kill children in retaliation in retaliation for another killing.
Local militias abduct and kill children in retaliation in retaliation for another killing.
Unknown gunmen kill four people in an apparent revenge attack.
on khat leaves.
protesters demonstrate against Egypt, accusing it of trying to derail peace talks.  The Transitional govt. is accused of being supported by Egypt.
protesters demonstrate against Egypt, accusing it of trying to derail peace talks.  The Transitional govt. is accused of being supported by Egypt.
Clash between factions of the RRA.
Clash between factions of the RRA.
Gunmen kill an aid worker (Annalena Tonelli) for unknown reasons.
Gun kill two British teachers.
Clans battle over land.
Clans battle over land.
Gunmen take over 150 farms in Lower Shabelle to grow marijuana.
Clans clash over a water well.
Militias clash over access to land and water.
Latest in a series of tit-for-tat clashes between clans after an elder is killed in April 2003.
Rival clans clash.
Hundreds of women protest against female circumcision.
Gunmen open fire on a vehicle carrying workers of aid agency GTZ.
Friendly fire incident when the leader of one of the militia factions is killed.
Thousands of protesters organized by a group of Muslim scholars (the Ulema) march to condemn gifts handed out by Christian aid groups.
Gunmen loyal to businessmen clash over control of a road.
Factional battle over unknown causes.
Series of clashes between forces of autonomous Somaliland and semi-autonomous Puntland.
Clash between subclans.
Clash between subclans in retaliation for killings the month prior.
Clash between rival subclans.
25,000 Somalis protest against a plan by the AU to dispatch peacekeepers.
Gunmen throw grenades into a cinema, killing civilians viewing a football match between Chelsea and Manchester United.
Tribes clash over the killing of a trader.
Under orders from Islamic courts, gunmen dig up an Italian cemetery and dump the remains in a dump.  The Somali police chief investigating is later gunned down.
Gunmen fire at the parliament speaker for the new transitional government.
Unknown gunmen kill a BBC producer, and a roadside bomb targets a delegation of the African Union.
protesters demonstrate against plans to send foreign peacekeepers to Somalia, including those from Ethiopia and Djibouti.
22 incidents of piracy on the Somali coast.
protesters demonstrate against plans to send foreign peacekeepers to Somalia, including those from Ethiopia and Djibouti.
protesters demonstrate against plans to send foreign peacekeepers to Somalia, including those from Ethiopia and Djibouti.
protesters demonstrate against plan to send Ethiopian peacekeepers to Somalia, they wave Somali and US flags because the US also opposes the plan.
protesters gather to support the Transitional Govt.  A warlord opposed to it fires on the crowd.
Fighting between rival militia over accusations that one of them is destabilizing the region.
Clans clash over land and water rights.
A bomb explodes at a stadium where the PM is giving a speech.
Thousands of protesters demonstrate against alleged desecration of the Koran by US interrogators at Guantanamo Bay.
Rival clans clash.
Rival clans clash.
Gunmen kill a Somali journalist.
Gunmen kill an aid worker and peace activist (Abdulkadir Yahya Ali).
Clans battle.
Clans battle for control of a town.
A warlord takes over a UNICEF office over a dispute about UNICEF's plans to withdraw from the town.
Four unknown gunmen open fire on a caf?.
Authorities in Somaliland arrest a senior Al-Qaeda operative after a major gunfight.
Unknown gunmen kill a UN security officer.
Gunmen kill a senior military officer charged with training a new army for the transitional government.
Members of a subclan clash.
Hundreds of police and then thousands of civilians protest the arrest of a Somali police chief in Sweden on charges of war crimes.
Militiamen clash over the establishment of an Islamic Court in the region.
Pirates attack a cruise liner off the Somali coast.
Gunmen attempt to assassinate the PM.  5 people die in a grenade attack.
Leader of the JVA clashes with his chief lieutenant over how to run the town and over the fate of 48 Asian fishermen held since August.
Protest in Mogadishu over the publication of cartoons purported to defame the Prophet.
Protest in Bossaso (in semi-autonomous Puntland) over publication in Europe of cartoons said to defame the Prophet.  Protesters turn violent and begin rioting.
Protest in Bossaso (in semi-autonomous Puntland) over publication in Europe of cartoons said to defame the Prophet.  Protesters turn violent and begin rioting.
The Alliance, a coalition of warlords, battles against Islamist militia in Mogadishu.  The fighting rages for three days.
Militias clash over the ownership of a piece of land next to the airport.
Gunmen attack a WFP food convoy.
Demonstration after Friday prayers in which Islamic court figures condemn Somali warlords and the US.  They declare holy war on the Alliance for the Restoration of Peace and Counter Terrorism.
Pirates hijack the Al Taj, a commercial ship, and kill one Indian crew member and take hostages.  The hostages are released a week later.
Fighting between Islamic Courts and an alliance of warlords after one of the alliance's commanders is assassinated.
Thousands of people rally, demanding an end to ongoing clashes and denouncing the Alliance.
Unknown clans battle.
Unknown clans battle.
Grenade tossed by unknown attacker wounds 4.
Two clashes between members of a subclan over who to appoint as military commander of the region.
Fighting between Islamic militia and alliance militia.
Muslim protesters denounce the US on 6/2 and 6/6.
Rival militias clash, 5 die.
Supporters of the alliance warlords gather to protest against the Islamists.
A clash at a checkpoint in Baidoa.
Militia fire into the air to disperse civilians gathered to watch World Cup.
Clash between subclans.
Islamic fighters drive secular militia from Jowhar.
Protests by Islamist supporters against the deployment of African peacekeepers, accusing Ethiopia and the US of interference.
Protests by Islamist supporters against the deployment of African peacekeepers, accusing Ethiopia and the US of interference.
Rival subclans allied to warlords clash over whether to accommodate fleeing militia before advancing Islamists arrive.
Protest in support of African peacekeepers.  2 unknown gunmen open fire on a checkpoint, killing 2 in Baidoa.
4000 Islamists demonstrate in support of the Islamic Courts.  A Swedish journalist is shot and killed by unknown gunmen.
A battle at a checkpoint just outside the capital.  The Haber Gedir clan was charging a tax on a road leading into the capital.
Demonstrators protest against the Islamic courts over a viewing ban of the World Cup.  Islamic gunmen open fire and kill 2.
Gunmen attack a WFP food convoy.
Clash between a warlord militia and the Islamic Court.  The warlord, the last remaining secular warlord in Mogadishu, surrenders.
Islamic militia fire on a tax protest, killing at least one.
Protest against the Islamic courts of unknown size.  Islamic militia shoot 2 dead.
3000 demonstrators gather to protest Ethiopia's deployment of troops in support of the transitional govt.
Unknown gunman shoots and kills a Transitional govt. minister.
Islamic supporters protest the deployment of Ethiopian troops in Somalia.
5 die in clash attributed to a revenge killing.
Thousands demonstrate against proposed African peacekeeper force.
Militiamen clahs with the Transititional Government police for control of the airport in Baidoa.
Gunmen loyal to the Islamic court assassinate a nun and her bodyguard over comments made by the Pope.  In a separate incident, gunmen open fire on a crowd watching a soccer game, killing 1.
An al-Qaeda suicide bomber attempts to assassinate the president of the Transitional Government.
500 protesters condemn attempt on the president's life.  Demand international peacekeepers
Thousands protest the Islamist takeover of Kismayu.  Islamist militia open fire, killing 2.  Several of more protests follow.
2006 Somalia Government
Islamist protesters demonstrate against Ethiopian forces in Somalia.
Clans clash when camels owned by one clan cross into the grazing land of another.
Muslims spurred on by the SICS demonstrate after the collapse of peace talks.  They condemn the transitional govt. and Ethiopia.
Muslims spurred on by the SICS demonstrate after the collapse of peace talks.  They condemn the transitional govt. and Ethiopia.
Muslim gunmen clash with a local militia.
Three suicide bombers explode ouside a government base.
Islamists protest against a US drafted UN Security Council resolution that would create a regional peacekeeping force.
Islamists protest against a US drafted UN Security Council resolution that would create a regional peacekeeping force.
protesters demonstrate, throw stones, and burn tires against the Ethiopian intervention in the civil war, as Ethiopia and transitional govt. forces are about to re-take Mogadishu.  Some protesters demonstrate in support of the govt.
400 protesters gather to demonstrate against Ethiopia and government disarmament campaign over the course of two days.  They burn tires and set up road blocks, loot and kill.  2 die in Mogadishu when Ethiopian troops open fire.  A similar prote
400 protesters gather to demonstrate against Ethiopia and government disarmament campaign over the course of two days.  They burn tires and set up road blocks, loot and kill.  2 die in Mogadishu when Ethiopian troops open fire.  A similar prote
US airstrike kills 8 to 10 with close ties to Al-Qaeda.
Fighting between unknown clans over where to park an armored car.
US strike against suspected terrorists.
Gun battle between police and militia.
Hundreds of Islamic court supporters demonstrate against imminent deployment of African peacekeepers.  They chant anti-govt. slogan and then burn tires and throw up roadblocks.
600 demonstrators protest against the presence of Ethiopian troops and the planned deployment of African peacekeepers.
Thousands of protesters march in favor of deploying African peacekeepers.  A bomb goes off, panicking the crowd and prompting govt. troops to fire into it.
Piracy.  Somali pirates hijack the MV Rozan, a UN ship containing food.  The crew is released in April.
Two CARE workers are kidnapped in Puntland.
Pirates seize a ship and then kill a hostage when their ransom is not met.
An unidentified person throws a bomb into a hall where people are watching a film.
Pirates attempt to hijack a WFP boat.  1 killed.
Puntland govt. attacks militants in Puntland.  The US joins in and shells the militants from the sea.
Gunmen clash in Mogadishu, set off a grenade in a market.
Clans battle for control over Kismayu.
Rival clans battle over access to pasture land and wells.
Rival clans battle over access to pasture land and wells.
Clans clash over a piece of land where charcoal is burned.
A merchant dies during a looting spree in the aftermath of a fire in the main market.
Puntland and Somaliland clash over control of Las Anod.
Pirates hijack the Almajan, a cargo ship.  Several other attacks are reported.
Hundreds of protesters demand the departure of Ethiopian troops.
Pirates seize a Japanese chemical tanker.
Pirates seize a ship, but the crew overpowers them.
Clans clash.
Abgal factions clash over a land dispute.
French journalist is kidnapped.
Militia kidnap 2 foreign aid workers.
Gunmen attack and loot the offices of an aid organization.
Gunmen abduct and release two Libyan diplomats.
6 die during a clash between police and the military in a dispute over checkpoints.
Somaliland and Puntland clash in a border dispute.  13 civilians die.
Gunmen kill two merchants suspected of selling goods to Ethiopian troops.
Pirates seize a Danish tug boat and hold the crew for a month.
US launches a missile attack on suspected Al-Qaeda targets.  8 wounded.
Hundreds of people protest against US airstrikes.
Clans clash over a land dispute.
Pirates take over a large French cruise liner in the Indian Ocean and take 30 hostages.
Gunmen throw a grenade into a cinema.
Pirates capture a Spanish fishing vessel and hold the crew for nearly a week.
Unknown gunmen clash, 10 die.
US strike kills a man identified as head of Al-Qaeda in Somalia, and several others.
Clan battle erupts over a land dispute.
More than a thousand people protest against a US airstrike.
Protesters turn out to demonstrate against skyrocketing food prices.  Government troops open fire, killing 2.  Soon after, tens of thousands of people take to the streets, hurling rocks at shops and cars.
Pirates hijack a Jordanian ship.
Gunmen kidnap 3 aid workers.  They are held hostage for nearly three months.
Gunmen shoot and kill a local journalist.
Gunmen kill a WFP driver.
Gunmen abduct a UN staffer in Mogadishu.  Pirates abduct a German couple and their son off a French yacht near Puntland.
Gunmen abduct a UN staffer in Mogadishu.  Pirates abduct a German couple and their son off a French yacht near Puntland.
Gunmen kill a peace activists for the Center for Research and Dialogue.
Gunmen throw a grenade into a cinema.
Gunmen abduct 3 aid workers clearing land mines.  They are released the same day.
Gunmen shoot and kill the local head of the UNDP.
Gunmen kill a noted peace activist, sparking a demonstration in Galkayo.
Gunmen kill a Food Program driver.
Gunmen kill a WFP driver.  Thousands demonstrate in response.
Clans clash over land dispute.
Gunmen kill a Food Program worker.
Gunmen abduct two foreign journalists.
Pirates seize two ships.
Gunmen abduct a German man and his Somali wife.  They are rescued a day later.
Pirates take over a Ukrainian ship full of weapons for Kenya.  Foreign warships surround the ship.
Remote controlled land mine kills an aid worker.
Gunmen briefly kidnap a Pakistani oil worker.
Gunmen kill an aid worker.
Gunmen kill a UNICEF worker.
Gunmen kill an aid worker.
A wave of coordinated suicide bombings occurs across Somaliland and Puntland, killing 20.  Targets include government intelligence facilities, a UN compound, the Ethiopian consulate, and the presidential palace in Somaliland's capital.
A wave of coordinated suicide bombings occurs across Somaliland and Puntland, killing 20.  Targets include government intelligence facilities, a UN compound, the Ethiopian consulate, and the presidential palace in Somaliland's capital.
Gunmen take 6 aid workers hostage.
Gunmen kill the deputy governor of the Bay region and an aid worker in Jamame.
Gunmen kill the deputy governor of the Bay region and an aid worker in Jamame.
Pirates seize an oil tanker containing 100 million dollars worth of crude oil, anchor the ship in Harardhere.
Pirates seize an Iranian cargo ship.
Indian warship destroys a pirate ship off the Somali coast.
Gunmen abduct two foreign journalists.
Gunmen grenade a cinema.
Pirates seize several ships including a Chinese cargo ship, a Malaysian tugboat, and a Turkish vessel.
Gunmen kill WFP workers.
Gunmen abduct an Egyptian teacher.
Gunmen abduct 4 UN workers and release them the same day.
Pirates menace several ships off the coast of Somalia.
Pirates take five ships in the space of a few days, including the US flagged Maersk Alabama.  US navy snipers kill 3 to rescue American crews.  French naval forces free four hostages, resulting in the death of 1 Frenchman and 4 pirates.
Gunmen kill two aid workers.
Gunmen fire mortars at a plane in the airport carrying a US Congressman (Don Payne).
25 gunmen abduct 2 MSF workers.
Gunmen kill a Somali journalist.
Pirates battle each other in a dispute over a car.
Gunmen storm a mosque and kill 5 Pakistani missionaries of the Islamic movement Tablighi Jamaat.
Gunmen open fire on guards of a World Food Program building when the guards refuse to allow the gunmen entry.
US military helicopters fire on a convoy carrying Al-Qaeda members, killing 6, including Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan, a suspect in the US embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania, prominent Al-Qaeda, and a senior leader of the Al-Shabab.
Sailors attack a ship in the harbor over a commercial dispute.
Pirates seize a Singapor-glagged container ship.
A crowd of Shabab supporters protests Israel's raid of a mosque in Jerusalem.
A bomb explodes in a Somaliland-Puntland border town.
Hundreds of protesters rally to demonstrate against the killing of 5 policemen in a roadside bomb attack.
Gunmen shoot dead a security officer working for the WFP.
Administrative districts battle each other over a land dispute.  8 die.
Armed protesters opposed to the demolition of their homes near the airport clash with government soldiers.
Hundreds of women and children march to protest the destruction of the tombs of Somali clerics by Shabab militants.  They also protest the influx of foreign fighters.
Two bombs explode inside a mosque, nearly killing one of Al-Shebab's leaders.
Gunmen kill a WFP driver.
Security forces of semi-autonomous Puntland storm a hijacked cargo vessel and outgun the pirates, but not before the pirates kill the captain.
Protesters demonstrate against the AU's plan to increase the number of peacekeepers they keep in the country.
Protesters demonstrate against the AU's plan to increase the number of peacekeepers they keep in the country.
Unknown attackers explode a grenade in a house where people were watching the World Cup.
Al-Shabab and an arms dealing militia clash with the forces of semi-autonomous Puntland.
Al-Shabab and an arms dealing militia clash with the forces of semi-autonomous Puntland.
Hundreds of Muslims demonstrate against US pastor Terry Jones' plan to burn Korans on the 9/11 anniversary.
Pirates kidnap Puntland's Fisheries minister and hold him for two days.
Clan militias clash.
Clan militias clash.
Hundreds march to demand aid for drought-stricken Somalia.
Police execute a soldier they suspect of being an insurgent.  The soldier's colleagues retaliate, resulting in a gunfight.
Clan militias attack a Somaliland  army base.
Unknown attackers bomb the Norwegian Refugee Council and the UN Mine Action Service.
A suicide bomber detonates at a police station.
Gunmen storm a mosque.
Gunmen attack a mosque in a repeat of the attack on the previous day.
Unknown bombers attack a minibus.
Islamist insurgents led by Sheik Ali Gamey, a militant linked to arms dealers, briefly seize control of a town in semi-autonomous Puntland.
Government troops open fire on civilians looting a WFP food distribution site.
A suicide bomber detonates at the foreign ministry.
A resident of a refugee camp shoots and kills three aid workers.
Fistfight broke out in parliament over election of new speaker, supporters of previous speaker injured.
Danish ship captured pirate mothership, rescued hostages from Iran and Pakistan and arrested pirates.
NGO worker and driver were killed when rocket propelled grenade was fired at car.
Pirates attacked Spanish warship that is part of EU flotilla fighting piracy, prompting a helicopter chase in which 6 attackers were arrested. 1 killed in the attack.
Foreign national was kidnapped by gunmen.
SEAL Team 6 raided camp where an American and a Danish aid worker were held. 9 kidnappers killed and both hostages were freed.
Gunmen shot and killed Abdi on his way home.
Suicide bomber attempted assassination of Qeybdid. Explosives killed the bomber and 2 bodyguards.
Citizens marched during anti-militant demonstration to protest against al-Qaida/al-Shabab merger. President participated in march.
Danish warship intercepted vessel used as mothership from which pirates operated, Danish navy fired on ship. 2 hostages killed, pirates detained.
Gunmen shot and killed Kadaf in front of his home.
Reporter for Radio Galkayo was shot dead as he returned home.
Suicide bomber driving car detonated explosives prematurely. No one else was wounded or killed.
Abdi was shot and killed by two gunmen while walking home.
Car bomb was exploded on street frequently used by Somali officials, one security officer wounded.
Hassan was wounded when gunmen opened fire on him.
Abdulle was killed by armed men after he left his station.
EU naval forces in attack helicopters conducted raid on pirate lair, destroying speed boats, fuel depots, and an arms store.
Citizens attacked a military base over land dispute. 8 people killed, including 3 soldiers.
Angry citizens marched through streets to demand release of people convicted of attacking military base.
Bomb was detonated in sprawling market and another at a checkpoint. 5 people killed.
Roadside bomb exploded as security forces tried to defuse it. 6 killed, including 3 civilians.
Puntland's troops launched a raid on the pirate infested town of Bargal.
Puntland forces in helicopter fired on house where Yuluh was believed to be, vehicles were destroyed in the attack.
Gunmen kidnapped three aid workers and took them to town used by pirates, Somali staffer wounded in attack.
A remotely detonated car bomb blast killed Garweyne.
Two suicide bombers were shot and killed by security forces as they attempted to attack meeting where leaders were voting on constitution.
Government troops opened fire on each other at a sports stadium, journalist Mohamud Ali Yare was killed by stray bullet.
Osman was shot and killed on his way to work by a gunman dressed in high school uniform.
Marshale was killed by attackers, worked for radio station that is critical of Al-Shebab.
Double suicide bombers detonated explosives at a restaurant frequented by politicians & journalists, 20 killed including bombers. 3 journalists among those killed.
Gunmen shot and killed Yusuge as he left station after night shift.
Attacker hurled a hand grenade in a busy street, one person killed. Police stated that military vehicle was believed to be target.
Suicide bomber dressed in army uniform detonated explosive at military checkpoint, killing only himself.
Spanish vessel was ambushed by small pirate boat, Dutch NATO vessel interecepted attackers.
Turyare was shot and killed by gunmen as he left mosque after evening prayers.
Awale, whose comedy had mocked at poked fun at Al-Shebab leadership, was shot and killed by gunmen.
An explosion believed to be a car bomb was detonated close to parliament, one killed.
Suicide car bomb explosion targeting convoy of troops killed only the bomber.
French troops failed to rescue an intelligence officer held by the terrorist group
Shebab launched a suicide bomb outside of the Prime Minister's house
Shebab bombed AU troops
Car bomb killed four in an attack on police
Car bomb killed one in an attack on Restaurant
Gunmen storm a Mosque and kill 7
Shebab launches two bombs on Lido Beach
Shebab used a car bomb to attack the Somali court system. A connected attack had gunmen firing on employees. Killing 39
Shebab rammed an explosive laden car into a Qatari convoy
Shebab fought their way onto the UN compound in the capital. Somali and African forces fought them off
Shebab bombed a market in Mogadishu
Shebab launched a suicide bomb against AU and Somali troops
A member of parliament had his car destroyed by a car bomb
A car bomb killed a driver in a car owned by the Ministry of public Works
Bomber targeted a Turkish hospital and Turkish Diplomats
Unknown gunmen killed a Swedish politician in a driveby attack
Shebab forces attacked AU troops, but were repulsed
Shebab ambushed the President's convoy
A car bomb killed fifteen in an explosion at a popular restaurant
US Navy Seals raid compound of Shebab
Shebab launched a suicide bomb that killed 15
US drone hit Shebab leadership
Shebab bombed a popular hotel
Militants killed three in an attempt to free prisoners in a prison in Bossaso
Shebab launched a surprise suicide attack against Beledweyne police
Shebab launched suicide bomb against Somali government
Syrian doctors shot by Shebab
Two al-Shebab suicide bombers attack a hotel.
The Kenyan military air strikes a Shebab training camp in Somalia.
A US drone strike kills a Shebab militant and his driver.
Shebab militants shell the capital.
Shebab targets government officials.
Shebab launches suicide attack against UN convoy at the airport.
9 Shebab rebels are killed after attacking the palace and killing five officials and guards.
Shebab kills two polio workers.
A suicide bomber attacks security officials at a caf_.
The SNA and AMISOM launch an operation to retake strongholds of Shebab militants.
The SNA and AMISOM launch an operation to retake strongholds of Shebab militants.
The SNA and AMISOM launch an operation to retake strongholds of Shebab militants.
The SNA and AMISOM launch an operation to retake strongholds of Shebab militants.
The SNA and AMISOM launch an operation to retake strongholds of Shebab militants.
The SNA and AMISOM launch an operation to retake strongholds of Shebab militants.
A car bomber prematurely detonates his bomb, killing only himself.
A car bomb targets an AMISOM convoy just outside the capital.
Shebab militants kill 8 in a suicide and armed attack.
Unknown gunmen shoot and kill British and French consultants working for the UN Office on Drugs and Crime.
A bomb planted underneath a car kills a legislator.
Two gunmen shoot and kill an MP.
A bomb planted in a government vehicle kills a top police officer and 4 others.
Two gunmen shoot and kill a teacher.
Shebab attacks a local official with a car bomb.
Warplanes strike Shebab strongholds.
Shebab fighter attack parliament with suicide bombs and guns.
A Turkish Airlines employee is shot and killed in a drive-by shooting.
Rival clans clash.
Clans battle over deaths in a previous clash the week before.
A bomb attached to a car kills a doctor and wounds others.
A bomb attached to a car kills a reporter.
Kenya's military strikes Shebab bases; Shebab claims a counterattack on Kenyan soldiers.
Kenya's military strikes Shebab bases; Shebab claims a counterattack on Kenyan soldiers.
Shebab attacks an AU base, killing two soldiers from Djbouti.
Shebab kills three soldiers.
Shebab attacks a market and solders with bombs and grenades; they kill a government official with a car bomb and shoot and kill a soldier.
Shebab shoots and kills a former minister and senior army commander and his bodyguard.
A suicide bomber attacks a checkpoint near parliament.
Suicide bombers attack the presidential palace.
Two soldiers are killed in separate car bomb attacks.
Two soldiers are killed in separate car bomb attacks.
A suicide bomber attacks the home of a prominent militia leader.
Shebab militants kill a female lawmaker in a drive-by shooting.
AU forces kill two Shebab leaders and attack a main base.
Two Shebab gunmen shoot and kill another MP.
A bomb hidden in trash kills three street cleaners.
A Shebab suicide bomber attacks a police chief, killing other policemen, too.
Shebab fighters attack soldiers and AU forces.
Government and AU forces attack a former warlord's house as part of the disarmament campaign.
AU forces launch Operation Indian Ocean and retake a Shebab stronghold.
Shebab attacks an intelligence headquarters; all 7 attackers are killed.
The US military carries out an strike against Shebab militants, targeting the groups leader who is killed.
Militants arrest people they suspect of spying for the US.
Somali and African forces retake a town from Shebab with little opposition.
Mortar shells strike a residential neighborhood.
A Shebab suicide bomber attacks an AU convoy, but kills 12 civilians.
Somali soldiers and African peacekeepers recapture a strategic port from Shebab without fighting.
A bomb explodes at a caf_.
Gunmen shoot and wound a TV reporter.
A car bomb targets a caf_.
A car bomb kills one at a hotel.
A car bomb kills 1 and injures 2.
Shebab militants attack a strategic island, regaining control from local forces.
A car bomb seriously injures two.
Shebab militants kill a man assisting the government with urban planning and drainage systems.
Gunmen shoot and kill a freelance journalist.
Kenyan military claims an attack on a Shebab camp after they attack non-Muslims in Kenya.
A man working for a foreign firm is targeted with a car bomb.
A suicide bomber rams a UN convoy, killing four.
A former lawmaker and his bodyguard are assassinated and another MP wounded in a drive-by shooting.
Shebab claims it shoots down a Kenyan military plane, killing the pilot; claim is disputed by Kenya.
Two suicide bombers attack a crowd and a restaurant
Shebab militants kill two women, prompting a reprisal murder of 5 women affiliated with Shebab.
Shebab militants attack an AU base, killing 4; 5 militants are killed.
The US military launches an air strike against a suspected Shebab leader.
6 soldiers and 1 civilian died in an attack on a military checkpoint in Baidoa and a car bombing in Mogadishu. 3 militants killed.
6 soldiers and 1 civilian died in an attack on a military checkpoint in Baidoa and a car bombing in Mogadishu. 3 militants killed.
Four killed in suicide car bombing in Mogadishu.
Al-Shabaab militants execute 4 people accused of being spies for Somali security agency & CIA.
23 killed in rival armed militia clan clash caused by a land dispute.
Suspected suicide car bomb attack hit a hotel where the Turkish delegation was meeting. Al-Shabaab suspected.
Several Al-Shabaab militants killed in an airstrike targeting a house used by Al-Shabaab militia. 4 civilians hit.
Al-Shabaab militants shot and killed a lawmaker. Militants claim to target MPs who allowed foreign troops in Somalia.
25 people killed and over 40 wounded after Al-Shabaab militants launch suicide attacks at hotel. 
Al-Shabaab militants fired mortar rounds at presidential palace._Guard killed.
Car bomb attack at hotel. Driver fled before bomb blew. 1 killed.
5 gunmen opened fire at fortified building. 1 Ethiopian solider killed. 3 gunmen blew themselves up, 1 shot dead by security.
Drone strike kills Adan Garer and 2 other Al-Shabaab militants.
Pirate hijack Iranian vessel off the coast of Somalia.
Al-Shabaab militants conduct car bomb attack and armed raid on hotel. 20 hour police operation ended on Saturday.
Kenyan fighter jets destroy two Al-Shabaab Islamist bases in southern Somalia in retaliation for Garissa.
Al-Shabaab militants hit education ministry with a car bomb before storming the building and killing 15 people.
Somali lawmaker shot dead in Mogadishu by Al-Shabaab militants.
3 African Union soldiers killed by Al-Shabaab militant ambush.
7 killed in Al-Shabaab attack on UN bus. 4 UNICEF workers among death toll.
9 killed by car bomb set off in Mogadishu restaurant.
Al-Shabaab militants kill Somali lawmaker in Puntland.
14 Iranian sailors kidnapped by Somali pirates.
Somali lawmaker shot dead in car. Other lawmaker escaped unhurt. Clash killed 18 militants & soldiers.
At least 35 people killed in weeklong clashes between clan and Ethiopian paramilitary (Liyu). Liyu accused of raping clan girl.
At least 3 killed in roadside bomb outside Mogadishu. Security force vehicle attacked.
Somali security forces shot dead 4 suspected Al-Shabaab gunmen, foiling an attack on a political conference.
Al-Shabaab militants launched suicide attack & armed raid on intelligence base. All attackers killed. 1 soldier killed.
Somali security forces conducted night raid on Al-Shabaab controlled town, targeting senior commanders.
Al-Shabaab militants killed 6 in a suicide attack on a UAE diplomatic convoy. Diplomats unhurt.
Al-Shabaab militants stormed an AU base killing dozens.
Al-Shabaab militants attack army camp, killing several and setting the base on fire.
Al-Shabaab militants stormed two hotels. Between 7-12 civilians/gunmen killed.
US drone strike aided by Kenyan intelligence killed at least 4 senior Al-Shabaab militants.
African Union troops and Somali troops launched an offensive against Al-Shabaab in the Gedo and Bay regions in southwest Somalia.
African Union troops & Somali government forces killed 7 civilians during offensive against Al-Shabaab. 3 AMISOM soldiers indicted.
African Union troops and Somali troops drive Al-Shabaab militants out of the last major towns in southwest Somalia.
Al-Shabaab militants kill several in car bomb attack on hotel housing diplomatic missions. Chinese diplomat killed.
Al-Shabaab militants assassinated Somali lawmaker, his guards, and his driver. 
Suicide bomber drove vehicle with explosives into an AU base, where Somali and Kenyan soldiers are present.
Car bomb attack at police station in Mogadishu. 
Dozens killed after Al-Shabaab militants attack army convoy in Gedo region.
Al-Shabaab militants briefly seized AU base via car bomb/armed raid, killing at least 50. AU took back the base, killing 46 militants.
Al-Shabaab militants killed 3 Somali soldiers in roadside bomb attack.
Car bomb attack on Villa Somalia, the presidential palace, and a car of foreign diplomats. 2 Polish citizens killed. 
Al-Shabaab militants kill president's nephew and other government official in drive-by shooting.
Kenyan military destroyed Al-Shabaab base in Yantooy by the Juba River in southern Somalia.
Al-Shabaab militants conduct car bomb attack and armed raid on hotel. 
Gunmen wound Somali lawmaker in drive-by shooting.
At least 20 killed, 120 wounded, and 90,000 forced to flee in clashes between armed militias of gunmen loyal to two clans. 
Somali pirates have attacked 2 fishing boats, capturing one from Iran and its 15 crewmembers.
US drone strike kills senior Al-Shabaab leader and 2 other militants.
Gunmen shot and killed UNHCR employee and another person.
At least 2 killed in gun attack on government official followed by a car bombing. Gun battle with security guards ensued.
1964 Ethiopia Government
1976 Ethiopia Government
1987 Ethiopia Government
1989 Ethiopia Government
Students protest the killing of 12 generals by loyalist troops.
Demonstrators march for peace.
Demonstrators protest the government takeover by rebel troops claiming the United States orchestrated the rebel win.
Demonstrators protest the government takeover by rebel troops claiming the United States orchestrated the rebel win.
Oromo and Issa militia clash over a territorial disputes.
Oromo and Amhara militias clash after the killing of an Islamic chief.
Bank employees strike to demand increased wages.
Zenami supporters gather to celebrate the one year anniversary of the ending of the Mariam regime.
Two ethnic Somali clans clash over grazing rights.
College students protest the role of the UN in Eritrea's quest for independence.
Clashes between students groups who support boycott and those who did not.
Formers independence fighters of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front protest a government decision to further withhold pay.
1994 Ethiopia Government
Unknown attackers shoot at a USAID diplomat.
1994 Ethiopia Government
Demonstrators protest the central government's decision to allow ethnic groups to secede.
Unknown gunmen attack motorcade of Pres. Mubarak, allegedly due to peace efforts between Israel and Muslim neighbors.
1995 Ethiopia Government
1996 Ethiopia Government
Ethiopians protest the government's decision to hold independence celebration in Adwa.
Ethiopians march in celebration of the 100th anniversary of independence from Italy.
1996 Ethiopia Government
Unknown gunmen kill a German tourist.
Gunmen shoot dead a French researcher.
A bomb explodes at a hotel.
Students protest agrarian reform.
Three grenade attacks are carried out in three days.  Ethnic Tigreans and foreigners are targeted.
1998 Ethiopia Government
Ethiopians protest recent clashes between Ethiopian and Eritrea forces over border disputes.
Taxi drivers strike over new traffic regulations and increases in fines.
A bomb explodes among crowds headed into a church.
1999 Ethiopia Government
1999 Ethiopia Government
Demonstrators protest over the arrest of 2 teachers who refused to teach the imposed new language called Wagagoda.
A bomb explodes under a commuter train.
Armed men attack and MSF vehicle.
Voters protest when they find ballot boxes stuffed with ballots when polling stations open.
Voters protest when they find ballot boxes stuffed with ballots when polling stations open.
Demonstrators protest UN threats of sanctions if Ethiopia and Eritrea don't end fighting.
Journalists strike over increased taxes on imported news.
Women stage a protest over rising domestic violence against women and children.
Students strike over repressive policies.
Bandits attack South African tourists.
Students strike demanding aid for farmers in the region.
Students strike demanding aid for farmers in the region.
Students strike demanding aid for farmers in the region.
Students strike demanding aid for farmers in the region.
Demonstrators protest a decision by the regional government to incorporate traditional farm land into town property.
Clashes between ethnic groups began over a disagreement regarding government posts
A bomb explodes at a hotel, injuring Indians and a Djibouti citizen.
Attackers throw a grenade into a vehicle.
Clashes between ethnic group in Sudanese refugee camps.
Violent clashes suspected to be caused by land disputes.
Unknown men throw a grenade into a tent.
2004 Ethiopia Government
Clashes between the Anuak tribe and Ethiopians from other areas Ethiopia.
Opposition supporters demonstrate demanding good governance.
Several attacks over the course of a month against opposition political party during the run up to an election.
Clashes between Oromo and Somali ethnic groups.
Ethnic clashes over land and cattle.
Ethnic clashes over land and cattle.
Ethnic clashes over land and cattle.
Pro-government supporters rally to show support for the ruling party.
Pro-government supporters march demanding peaceful elections.
Students protest election results.
Taxi drivers strike over election results and to show support for protesting students.
Several grenade bombings in the region near the Somali border.
Opposition supporters renew protests over election results.
Opposition supporters renew protests over election results.
Opposition supporters renew protests over election results.
Opposition supporters renew protests over election results.
Opposition supporters renew protests over election results.
Opposition supporters renew protests over election results.
Opposition supporters renew protests over election results.
CUD calls for general strike demanding democratic reform and press freedom.
Students clash with police during riots.
Students protest election results.
Protesters demonstrate against the ruling party and the Ethiopian Orthodox Church.
European embassy staff and Ethiopian civilians are abducted by an unknown group.
Four bombs are exploded throughout the capital.
Six bombs are exploded in Addis Ababa.
Islamic youth attack Christians when they discover a resteruant using pages of the Koran to wrap food.
Market traders refuse to leave their kiosks to make allow for the construction of a shopping complex.
Guji and Borena clan clash over water, land and cattle.
Guji and Borena clan clash over water, land and cattle.
Guji and Borena clan clash over water, land and cattle.
Ethnic Anuak militants are suspected of attacking a bus.
Two bombs explode.
Muslims riot over the demolition of a half built mosque.
Fuel truck drivers march to demand changes in discriminatory transport rules.
Suleiman and Marehan clans clash over land ownership.
Christians and Muslims clash over the celebration of religious holidays.
Borana and Gabrta tribe clash over grazing land.
Students protest the theft of body organs of a dead student and the refusal of university officials to interven.
A bomb explodes, killing one person.
Students protest the relationship of the Church with the ruling party, sensorship of speech and a meeting between church officials and Beyonce.
Opposition supporters protest central government use of intimidation to force opposition candidates to drop out of the election.
An Islamic militant group sets off a bomb.
An opposition candidate is stabbed to death by unknown attackers.
Gunmen attack and kill a foreign oil worker.
Unknown bombers plant a bomb in an Eritrean-Ethiopian town.
Attackers hurl a bomb at a political meeting, killing two.
Soldiers attack a rebel group.
Gunmen attack and kill opposition party activists.
Soldiers attack a rebel group.
Rebels claim they have killed 267 soldiers in several attacks.
Hundreds of Eritrean exiles demonstrate to protest their country's autocratic rulership.
Tens of thousands take to the streets to celebrate the ruling party's 20th year in power, and the overthrow of Mengistu Haile Mariam.
Throughout the year, Muslims staged weekly peaceful protests in the capital city decrying the government's interference in community elections. They believed this interference was meant to promote a moderate, more controllable form of Islam.
Gunmen attacked a bus in western Ethiopia, killing 19 and wounding several others. They stole money and clothes from the passengers before opening fire. In response, Ethiopia launched a military strike on a base within Eritrea.
Gunmen fired on citizens near an agricultural company headquarters in western Ethiopia. Several suspects were later extradited from Sudan.
Muslims clashed with police
Muslims protested legal restrictions on religious practices at two mosques in the capital city. 17 leaders were arrested for 'extremism' and illegal protesting.
Two tribes in southern Ethiopia clashed over land. At least two dozen were killed before federal and local forces restored order.
Members of a rebel group led by a faith healer from south Sudan refused to give up their weapons after encountering Ethiopian troops, instead attacking. 16 Rebels were killed.
Muslims attacked a police station in response to the supposedly undemocratic election of the Supreme Council on Islamic Affairs, the country's largest representative body for Muslims. They tried to free several demonstrators held at the station. Three Protesters were killed, as was one officer.
A group of ten camping Austrian tourists were attacked by armed bandits who stole technical equipment, and one of them was killed
4,000 to 10,000 demonstrators protested to demand the immediate release of jailed journalists and activists and to call for the reform of policy issues for the high cost of living and to protest what they called the forced displacement of ethnic groups from farming projects
Hundreds of Muslims protested, accusing the government of encouraging a moderate teaching of Islam and demanded the release of imprisoned Muslim activists and clashed with police
Hundreds of Muslims protested, accusing the government of encouraging a moderate teaching of Islam and demanded the release of imprisoned Muslim activists and clashed with police
Muslims chanted slogans asking the government to respect their rights and were beaten by police
Police raided Blue Party opposition headquarters and beat up some party members and seized banners and equipment that would have been used during a street protest the next day
Eritrean refugees protested in two camps to call for resettlement and began rioting, which lasted three days
Attackers blew up a minibus and killed four people
Ethiopians protested outside the Saudi embassy over a crackdown against illegal immigrants in Saudi Arabia and police beat and arrested up to 100 of the protesters
unidentified gunmen opened fire on bus killing 9 and wounding seven, location is near the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam
students protesting government proposals to extend administrative control into Oromia state, causing fears of land grabs; protests spread from campuses to nearby towns
students protesting government proposals to extend administrative control into Oromia state, causing fears of land grabs; protests spread from campuses to nearby towns
students protesting government proposals to extend administrative control into Oromia state, causing fears of land grabs; protests spread from campuses to nearby towns
hundreds of Muslim protesters demonstrated to demand release of 17 leaders who were jailed under terrorism charges during protests in 2013 accusing government of interfering in religious affairs
Over a hundred thousands protesters gather in Meskel Square to protest the the killing of Ethiopian Christian in Libya and rising poverty in Ethiopia. The protest was government supported but turned violent when protesters threw stones, 100 arrested. 
Ethiopian authorities kill 30 suspected Eritrean forces attempting to illegally cross the border.
Oromo protesters gather throughout the region against the government's attempt to exert more control at the region citing fear of land grabs as the main reason for the demonstrations. 
Oromo protesters gather throughout the region against the government's attempt to exert more control at the region citing fear of land grabs as the main reason for the demonstrations. 
Oromo protesters gather throughout the region against the government's attempt to exert more control at the region citing fear of land grabs as the main reason for the demonstrations. 
Oromo protesters gather throughout the region against the government's attempt to exert more control at the region citing fear of land grabs as the main reason for the demonstrations. 
A mosque in the capital is targeted by a grenade attack. Authorities do not know who is responsible. 
Former EPLF fighters protest government's decision to deny wages by seizing airports, banks and other businesses
1997 Eritrea Government
Students protest death of fellow student in Ethiopian detention camp
Students protest death of two students at Ethiopian detention camps
1999 Eritrea Government
Students march through capital to rally citizen support of more AIDS education
Citizens march, protesting U.N. arms embargo and asking for condemnation of Ethiopian attacks
Students arrested after refusing to report to summer work camps in protest of union president's arrest
Detained journalists go on a hunger strike, protesting poor living conditions and lack of charges brought
2003 Eritrea Government
Unknown attackers kill two aid workers.
Citizens arrested for working for UN instead of the military riot in prison
Unknown attackers set off a bomb.
Eritrean rebels attack soldiers.
Eritrean rebels attack soldiers.
 groups, such as those who kidnapped several tourists in January.
 groups, such as those who kidnapped several tourists in January.
More than 100 soldiers took over the information ministry building to denounce the hardline government and ended peacefully after a few hours
Up to dozens of people were detained after a protest by soldiers on January 21, including a regional governor and senior military officers
1975 Angola Government
3000 shipyard workers strike for one morning to protest currency reforms.
Rebels abduct a mechanic contracted by Chevron.
1991 Angola Government
2500 oil workers strike for higher pay and improved housing.
Unknown number of grenade attacks on oil company vehicles and marketplaces.
4 people die in clashes with police after violence breaks out at a football match.
Cabinda rebels attack oil company assets and government, demanding a share of oil profits as well as independence for the province.
Nine civilians die when govt. soldiers run amok after separatist guerillas kill 3 of their comrades.
An election rally turns violent when a grenade goes off.  No one is hurt, but the event triggers a riot.  The government blames UNITA (main opposition party and rebel movement) and beats 3 suspects.
UNITA rebels take 70 Russian and Brazilian workers hostage.
Demobilized soldiers take to the streets, burning cars and attacking pedestrians, demanding back pay.
Riots erupt in a major marketplace targeting immigrants from Zaire after the govt. accuses Zaire of deploying troops to back UNITA rebels.
Police and dockworkers join a mob looting an aid ship owned by the World Food Program.  Troops are called in to disperse the riot.
1994 Angola Government
A feud in a marketplace turns into a firefight between soldiers and police that kills six bystanders.
Primary and secondary school teachers strike for salary raise.  Govt. raises their salaries by 170 percent.
1000 primary and secondary school teachers strike over pay.
1996 Angola Government
Bandits attack a truck.
40 govt. soldiers attack an area near a UN demobilization camp where UNITA rebels are being disarmed.  Ensuing fight kills 2 govt. soldiers.
UNITA soldiers to be integrated into the army protest when they find out that their assigned unit is far from their homes.
Gunmen kill civilians.  Government blames UNITA.
Gunmen kill civilians.  Government blames UNITA.
Gunmen kill civilians.  Government blames UNITA.
Bandits attack a car, killing civilians.
More than 600 men of an unknown group raid a Catholic mission, killing 32 people and causing 2000 others to flee.
Thousands of Mobutu supports from Zaire flee to Angola after he is deposed.  They join UNITA and low level violence erupts in the northwest province of Lunda Norte.
UNITA rebels torch 60 houses and steal 50 heads of cattle.  They hack to death two people.
UNITA ambushes an army patrol, resulting in the deaths of 5 soldiers and 2 civilians.
UNITA rebels detain 6 members of a UN team for 3 days.
UNITA troops detain seven UN observers for several days.
Gunmen attack a DeBeers car, wounding two.
Civilians are killed in two attacks on cars by ex-rebels intimidating travelers.
Civilians are killed in two attacks on cars by ex-rebels intimidating travelers.
Unknown gunmen kill five civilians, including two German aid workers.
Criminal elements attack a WFP convoy.
UNITA shells several villages in Huila province, forcing hundreds to flee.
An armed gang ambushes civilians.
A gang of former soldiers ambushes a coach, killing its passengers and looting it.
1998 Angola Government
A gang ambushes civilians, killing 20, and then loots the bodies in Cisseka.  In Katata, gangs attack an admin building and seize a vehicle.
A gang ambushes civilians, killing 20, and then loots the bodies in Cisseka.  In Katata, gangs attack an admin building and seize a vehicle.
About 100 former rebels and government forces battle for control of a town.
Former rebels attack several villages in a looting spree.
Former rebels attack several villages in a looting spree.
Former rebels attack several villages in a looting spree.
Former rebels attack several villages in a looting spree.
A gang of bandits abducts 15 people.
Gunmen kill a government envoy.  Motive unclear.
people are killed.
Armed bands murder and loot 16 people throughout Angola over a week at the end of May.  Exact locations not given.
Bandits attack an aid convoy.
Armed bands murder at least seven people.
Armed bands murder at least seven people.
Armed bands murder at least seven people.
UNITA gunmen kill 16 police and bombard a local town.
A raid by armed men kill 11 people.
An aid convoy comes under attack from armed gunmen.  A UN observer is killed.
Bandits ambush a vehicle, killing several people, including a nun.
Armed men raid a diamond mine owned by Branch Energy, killing 8.
Armed men raid a diamond mine owned by DiamondWorks, killing 5.
Teaching staff strikes for salary increases and better working conditions.
Police and militiamen trade fire in a dispute over a football ticket.  Army forces intervene.
An armed gang murders and robs a Portugese oil worker.
Demonstration against fuel prices.  Police disrupt with batons.
About 500 people protest against a steep hike in fuel prices.
About 20,000 people protest the ongoing civil war, demanding that the govt. and the rebels negotiate.
Armed bandits attack a refuge for children, killing one and abducting 21 others.
Bandits attack two buses and a car, killing dozens.  Exact death count not known.
Poorly observed strike by civil servants demanding pay raises.
Small number of protesters demonstrate against over alleged govt. purchases of arms from France.
Bandits attack a group of farmers harvesting their crops.
Riot police attempt to remove residents from a Luanda shantytown, shoot two unarmed men.
About 10,000 people march in a govt. organized protest against a UNITA attack on a refugee train, which killed more than 250 people.
University teachers strike for higher pay.
Public school teachers strike to demand salary increases.
2002 Angola Government
Professors strike for higher pay.
Armed groups attack villages and vehicles in Huila.
Students protest against ongoing professor strike.  Govt. violently represses.
Bandits attack a minibus full of Congolese passengers believed to be part of illegal diamond trading.
Bandits attack a bus.
Presidential guards drown a youth for singing an anti-govt. song.
Militias and symathizers attached to MPLA attack and intimidate UNITA supporters and officials in Jan. and Feb.  One UNITA supporter is killed by police.
2004 Angola Government
Riot over the sale of a govt. generator.  Local residents accuse the administrator of seeling the generator for personal gain.
Market traders stage protest to oppose closing of a streeside market.  The demonstration turns into a riot and the police use deadly force.
Opposition supporters claim govt. forces torched an office of an opposition party.
A popular opposition leader is assassinated.
15,000 people protest ongoing war between Govt. and Cabinda seperatists.  Organized by local human rights organization.
The new UNITA leader visits a town, sparking unrest.  protesters attack the house of the local deputy administrator and burn homes beloning to ethnic Ovimbundos.
Clash between govt. forces and the Katangan Tigers, a former rebel group from the DRC.  The Tigers were engaged in illegal diamond mining.
12 people die of suffocation in police custody and their bodies are thrown into a river.  Civilians protest this, and the police open fire, killing at least 5.
12 people die of suffocation in police custody and their bodies are thrown into a river.  Civilians protest this, and the police open fire, killing at least 5.
A truck driver's brakes fail and he careens into a carnival parade, killing 38.  The crowd reacts angrily and begins to riot.  Police are called in to disperse.  There are no further reports of violence.
Thousands of workers organized by three labor unions march to demand a minimum wage.
protesters demonstrate against a proposed cease fire between govt. forces and those of a Cabinda rebel organization.  Police open fire, wounding 2.
2007 Angola Government
An escape attempt from a local jail leads to a prison riot in which 20 are killed.
Gangs of Angolan soldiers rape as man as 100 Congolese women working in local diamond mines.
Tens of thousands of Catholics rush to see the Pope speak, triggering a stampede in which two die.
Gunmen attack the Togo football team on their way to the African Cup.
Citizens gather to protest the attacks on the Togo football team.
UNITA walks out of parliament in a protest over election uncertainty.
Citizens gather to protest poor behavior in the Togo football team shooting trials.
Separatists attack a military vehicle guarding Chinese miners.
Angola's ruling party rallies more than 20,000 people to march in favor of the government in response to an anonymous call on Facebook for dissidents to organize anti-government protests.
About 20 demonstrators gather to answer an anonymous call on Facebook to organize protests against the ruling party.  The government arrests them.
Police break up a protest of about 100 students and rappers rallying in the capital to demand that president Jose Eduardo Dos Santos resign.
About 700 anti-government and anti-corruption activists march to demand freedom of expression and justice.
Youths protested against the government
About 100 people protest against the president's regime.  The police respond with violent brutality.
Prisoners at an overcrowded prison rioted in protest of overcrowding, and the resulting lack of food and medical services. Guards fired on the prisoners, killing several.
Opposition legislators walked out of the National Assembly in protest of the parliament's decision to re-elect Suzanna Ingles as head of the National Electoral Comission
Young Angolans gathered to protest President Eduardo dos Santos' corruption and the country's poor living conditions several times- most being shut down by police. Veterans also joined to demand late pensions and promised welfare benefits.
Young Angolans gathered to protest President Eduardo dos Santos' corruption and the country's poor living conditions several times- most being shut down by police. Veterans also joined to demand late pensions and promised welfare benefits.
Young Angolans gathered to protest President Eduardo dos Santos' corruption and the country's poor living conditions several times- most being shut down by police. Veterans also joined to demand late pensions and promised welfare benefits.
350 policemen from Guinea-Bissau, stranded in Angola after a multinational training program was shut when relations between the two countries soured, staged a hunger strike to draw attention to their situation.
About 100 members of a youth movement gathered to demand answers over the disappearance of two of its members last year and police stopped the protest before it began and arrested some of the protesters and confiscated equipment from journalists on the scene
An activist with the opposition party Unita was attacked by people from the local MPLA with knives and rocks and died and six others were injured in the attack
The Angolan Revolutionary Movement organized a protest against the authoritarian regime of President Santos and three youths were bundled by police into pick-up trucks
A Greek-owned oil tanker with 27 crew is hijacked by pirates.
protesters protested against the government in the northern oil producing enclave of Cabinda, police arrested activists Marcos Mavungo and Arao Bula Tempo.
Police raided the Seventh Day Light of the World Church and arrested the sect's leader Jose Julino Kalupeteka. According to police sources, 13 civilians and 9 police members were killed. According to UNITA opposition party, 1080 people were killed.
Police raided a youth opposition meeting in Luanda, arresting 13 people, caliming that they planned to attack and oust president Jose Eduardo dos Santos.
protesters protested against the arrest of youth opposition activists on June 21, but were violently repressed by the police.
Police arrested 20 people at a vigil for detained youth opposition activists, who have been held without trial since June.
Police arrested 18 activists handing out leaflets in support of anti-government youth opposition activists detained in June.
1977 Mozambique Government
Railworkers strike, demanding withheld wages and bonuses
City council workers strike, demanding wage increase
Health workers strike and riot demanding higher wages
Railworkers strike and assault lead rail officials
City bus workers strike demanding back wages
Mutineer soldiers block main highway, protesting non-payment of wages
Demobilised soldiers block road, demanding higher wages and benefits
Veterans occupy political offices, electricity station, and create a road block demanding wages
Demobilised soldiers hold demonstration demanding government assistance
Demobilised soldiers riot, demanding compensations for servie
State-owned media workers strike, demanding higher wages
Soldiers walk out of demobilisation camps, protesting living conditions
Soldiers walk out of demobilisation camps, protesting living conditions
Demobilised soldiers protest against poor living conditions
Demobilised soldiers riot, protesting poor conditions
Soldiers riot and attack police, killing 3 in a protest demanding back wages
Mutineer soldiers riot, raiding suburbs of Maputo
Demobilised soldiers block roads and loot a small town demanding wages and benefits
Election workers take a hostage and threaten to burn election offices, demanding higher wages
Special forces attack police, demanding release of soldiers detained for attacking a woman
Zimbabwean rebels kidnap 14 Mozambicans to hold for ransom
Former militants demand equal treatment and are fired upon and arrested by police forces
Students strike, protesting lack of food and transportation
Workers strike, demanding changes to unspecified parts of their contracts
Police kill 1 while breaking up workers' strike
Political demonstrations turn violent after police fire rubber bullets into crowd
Meteorologists strike, demanding night shift allowances
Construction workers strike, demanding equal pay as South Africans
Citizens protest violence in East Timor and demand UN intervention
Two opposing political parties violently clash
RENAMO supporters attack a police station in an attempt to seize weapons
Refugees protest in front of UN refugee agency, claiming maltreatment in camps
Demonstrators protest election results by taking hostages, marching
Police crowd opposition supporters into small prison cells, asphyxiating 83
Workers strike, demanding higher wages
Workers strike, demanding higher wages
Workers strike, demanding higher wages
Former RENAMO fighters protest, accusing leader of acquiescing to opposition
Citizens storm regional government, blaming it for purposefully spreading cholera
Workers strike, demanding higher wages
Many political rallies turn violent in days leading up to election
Former migrant workers invade German Embassy, demanding back wages
Mine-clearing workers strike, demanding payment of back wages
Renamo supporters protest election results and clash with opposition supporters, killing 5
Citizens protest increases in bus fares
Mob attacks health workers after rumors surface of workers intentionally spreading cholera
After being arrested for attacks on health workers, citizens attack each other in prison
Police shoot two construction workers on wage strike
Two men grab a policeman's gun and attempt to assassinate the opposition's presidential candidate
Petroleum companies shut off supply, protesting failure of government to pay promised subsidies in exchange for lowering prices
Citizens march, protesting health ministry's closing of specialized HIV centers
Malawian police attack a Mozambican police station
A mob attacks health workers, accusing them of spreading cholera.
A mob attacks health workers, accusing them of spreading cholera.
Citizens protest and riot over the price of food.
South African soldiers cross into Mozambique and attack citizens.
700 civil war veterans demonstrate to demand pensions from the government.
Around five hundred indviduals protested in Cateme after they were displaced by Brazilian mining company Vale's coal railway and given inadequate housing. Police arrested fourteen protesters.
Former rebels affiliated with Renamo kidnapped an old man, believing he was an informant for the ruling Frelimo party. The rebels numbered about three hundred.
Members of a group of three hundred former rebels camped outside the Renamo headquarters in Nampula opened fire on police, killing one. An additional officer and two former rebels were wounded and the rebel camp was cleared by police.
Gangs kidnapped at least forteen weathly Muslims in Maputo for ransom. Police arrested about fifteen gangmembers and killed gang leader Orquilio Nhassengo in a raid.
A protest responding to a local government increase in bus fare turned violent when youths began attacking buses, burning tires, and setting up road blocks.
Employees of the national airline went on strike in an attempt to secure better wages and working conditions.
Doctors of Mozambique protest poor working conditions and few resources
Veterans of the previous civil war demonstrated asking for pensions
Police arrested and beat political opposition
Renamo supporters launched a counter attack on Mozambique police after they repressed a Renamo party office
Police say that Renamo supporters attacked civilians. Renamo argues that they had no part in the attack
protesters demonstrate demanding more money for resettlement
protesters demonstrate against disparity in wages
Doctors of Mozambique protest poor working conditions and few resources
Armed militants attacked a government armoury. Officials stated that it was Renamo who was behind it
Armed militants affiliated with Renamo attacked civilians
The Army attacked a rebel camp
Renamo militants attacked government forces
Renamo forces attempted to ambush government forces. Only rebels were killed, though
Mozambique forces capture rebel stronghold
Renamo militants attacked a police station
Government forces overrun Renamo military base
Thousands protest the rise in kidnappings in Mozambique
Four soldiers died in ambush by Renamo soldiers
Armed Militants robbed wealthy business man
Renamo supporters ambushed government troops killing one
Renamo supporters protested the current government and were beaten back by police
Renamo supporters protested the current government and were beaten back by police
Youth protested the current conscription policies
Combatants from the Mozambique civil war skirmish killing one police officer.
Renamo militants kill 4 border police and wound 5 others in an ambush.
Reports surface that prison guards are exploiting female prisoners in exchange for basic goods.
In a protest organized by Amnesty International, 300 women march on parliament in opposition to a law allowing rapist to marry their victim.
A Belgian woman has her hand nearly cut off in a machete attack during an armed robbery by three unidentified assailants.
A militia group fires at a Brazilian owned coal train injuring 1.
A judge who had been investigating a string of kidnappings was killed by unidentified gunmen.
Renamo militants launch near daily attacks against targets on the national road.
Hundreds march on the wealthy suburbs of the capital in response to legislation giving the president and lawmakers perks and allowances.
A young man is shot in the feet after trying to stop ballot stuffing. Elsewhere riot police use teargas to disperse a large crowd watching the ballot counting.
A young man is shot in the feet after trying to stop ballot stuffing. Elsewhere riot police use teargas to disperse a large crowd watching the ballot counting.
Opposition party Renamo held protests across the country to oppose the recent confirmation of last October's election results. 
Villagers in Mavodze detained a German and a Swedish journalist who they suspected to be spies; the journalists were held at the police station and released the same day.
Economist and journalist Carlos Castel-Branco was arrested and charged with rebellion after writing a Facebook post criticizing the government.
A prominent lawyer who had received government criticism for his support of an opposition plan to give provinces more autonomy was hit in a drive-by shooting and died in the hospital.
Students and teachers from two universities in Beira attempted to march in protest of the killing of constitutional lawyer Gilles Cistac, but were prevented by police.
Thousands demonstrated to condemn the assassination of constitutional lawyer Gilles Cistac and call for justice.
Thousands demonstrated to condemn the assassination of constitutional lawyer Gilles Cistac and call for justice.
Appoximately 200 people blockaded the border with South Africa and threw rocks at vehicles to protest attacks in South Africa against Mozambicans and other immigrants.
Renamo fighters carried out two attacks in Tete province against government forces, violating the peace agreement; Renamo denied that it had initiated the clashes.
The leader of the Renamo party held a rally to call for peace and stability in the country following clashes between armed Renamo supporters and the military.
The convoy of opposition leader Afonso Dhlakama was hit by gunfire at a roadblock, wounding three.
Nineteen members of the Renamo party and one civilian bus driver died in a shootout around a Renamo party convoy.
Police blockaded Renamo leader Afonso Dhlakama in his house and demanded the return of weapons obtained from a shootout on September 25.
Clashes between government forces and Renamo forces killed several people in Morrumbala, where Renamo recently established a new military base.
Students run riot against doubling of corn meal price and demand that one party rule of Kenneth Kaunda be brought to an end.  Military opens fire, killing many.  Riots diffuse to many of Zambia's smaller cities.
Students run riot against doubling of corn meal price and demand that one party rule of Kenneth Kaunda be brought to an end.  Military opens fire, killing many.  Riots diffuse to many of Zambia's smaller cities.
Students run riot against doubling of corn meal price and demand that one party rule of Kenneth Kaunda be brought to an end.  Military opens fire, killing many.  Riots diffuse to many of Zambia's smaller cities.
Students run riot against doubling of corn meal price and demand that one party rule of Kenneth Kaunda be brought to an end.  Military opens fire, killing many.  Riots diffuse to many of Zambia's smaller cities.
Mozambican rebels foraging for food and supplies attack civilians in Zambia.
Massive rally in Kabwe as pro-democracy activists demand end to one-party rule.
Series of RENAMO food and supply raids on Zambian targets.  Two raids result in no fatalities.  One raid on the 24th against a convoy results in 10 fatalities.
University lecturers strike at University of Zambia (Lusaka) and Coppberbelt University (Kitwe), demanding removal of vice chancellors and new conditions of service.
University lecturers strike at University of Zambia (Lusaka) and Coppberbelt University (Kitwe), demanding removal of vice chancellors and new conditions of service.
Some 150,000 people attend a rally rejecting a constitutional proposal.
Youths ransack the offices of the United National Independence Party and tear down portraits of the former president.
Hundreds of supporters of MMD riot against supporters of UNIP.
In town of Mongu a petrol bomb blows up the house of a MMD coordinator.  In the Mufulira, six houses of MMD supporters are burned down.  Events occur in context of austerity measures and increases in the price of maize.
In town of Mongu a petrol bomb blows up the house of a MMD coordinator.  In the Mufulira, six houses of MMD supporters are burned down.  Events occur in context of austerity measures and increases in the price of maize.
Soccer fans riot when they are unable to gain entrance to the World Cup match between Zambia and Morocco.
Soccer fans march to protest so-called biased refereeing in the match that kept Zambia out of the World Cup finals.
100 blind people attack the Zambia Council for the Handicapped demanding payment for a rehabilitation project.
Students at Northern Technical College boycot classes over poor teaching conditions and allowances paid by the government.
Students riot over proposal to change the university's name.  Police repress with tear gas.
Minor by-election related violence.  A policeman and a presiding officer are beaten up when they try to break up scuffles between rival supporters.  Elsewhere, four people are stabbed and a ruling party official is pelted with bricks.
Race riots erupt when black Zambians come to believe that Zambians of Asian descent are trading in human organs after a series of ritualistic murderers.
Hundreds of soldiers riot, seeking revenge for a comrade's death.  They kill two people, slaughter livestock and burn 2000 huts.
Election workers boycott work in protest of poor daily allowances.
Civil servants march, demanding a pay increase on 2/23.  Police use tear gas.  On 2/27, over 120,000 civil servants strike over govt. refusal to pay them a salary increase.
Clashes over by-election.  Several people seriously wounded.  Police fire tear gas.
Over 2000 railway workers strike demanding increased pay.
A shadowy group claims responsibility for a blast at the presidential palace.  Occurs in the context of general unease over new constitutional amendments.
A bomb explodes ouside the offices of the Times of Zambia a week after unknown parties threatened the lives of the workers there.  Occurs in the context of general unease over new constitutional amendments.
A bomb explodes at Lusaka airport, killing one police officer.  The group Black Mamba takes credit.  Occurs in the context of a controversial proposal for new constitutional amendments.  The blast sparks unrest at the University of Zambia.
About 200 doctors strike for better wages.
About 200 doctors strike for better wages.
About 200 doctors strike for better wages.
Hundreds of students riot, stoning cars as they pass by campus, injuring a British Airways crew.  Riot is presumably over upcoming elections.  Police use tear gas.
Hundreds of stone throwing students battle police after govt. fails to pay subsidies.  Student boycotts also occur.
Unauthorized vendors stage a demonstration, followed by a violent riot against police who are trying to shut them down.  Police use tear gas and live ammunition to repress.
Police crackdown on rally by opposition parties.  Several are wounded, including former president Kenneth Kaunda.
Sporadic demonstations around Zambia occur in reaction to alleged assassination attempt of former president.
Civil servants strike over pay demands.
A coup is attempted by mutinous soldiers.  The attempt is crushed.  One rebel is killed.
About 200 supporters of Kenneth Kaunda stage peaceful protest outside courthouse as Kaunda appears at a hearing within.
Government employees stage one day work stoppage over a wage freeze.
University workers strike for better conditions.
Miners strike demanding better housing allowances.  Strikers escalate to rioting, and the police repress with live ammunition and tear gas, killing 2.
Angolan raiders loot a shop in Zambia, resulting in one death.
Five bombs explode around the capital, killing 1 at the Angolan embassy.  17 more unexploded bombs are eventually found.
Students march, accusing the govt. of having a hidden agenda with Angolan rebels.
Lecturers strike over conditions of service.  On 5/19, students protest over delay in exams caused by a university strike.  Police break up with arrests.
300 junior doctors strike over pay.
42 senior doctors strike over pay and over the dismissal of 300 striking junior doctors.
Women activists protest against police failure to arrest a serial killer.  Police arrest scores of people.
400 lecturers and researchers strike against non-payment of salaries.
Police arrest over 300 protesters for illegally demonstrating against the president, who is seeking a third term.
50 sacked junior doctors stage an anti-govt. march, but are detained and arrested.
Students riot over tuition increases.  Police break up the riot.
Students protest over tuition increases escalates to violent riot.  Police violently beat students and arrest many.
Soccer fans riot after Zambia loses to Rwanda.  Police use tear gas.
More than 500 DRC soldiers who fled into Zambia stage hunger strike over a delay in their repatriation.
Congolese rebels cross the border into Zambia and abduct two women.
Youths assault two cabinet members in a dispute over whether the president can run for a third term.
Protest against calls for the president to serve a third term.
MMD supporters besiege the house of Zambia's first lady, protesting against her husband's bid for a third term.
Food riot by hundreds of refugees who clash with police.  Police repress, 1 person is killed.
Massive series of protests organized by opposition parties and students opposing the president's quest for a third term.  Students boycott classes.  Police use tear gas and a riot ensues on May 5.
Supporters of the president beat up several govt. ministers who oppose the president's bid for a third term.
80,000 civil servants strike over pay demands.
Nurses strike demanding better pay at the University Teaching Hospital.
Several violent clashes occur between rival party supporters around the time of a by-election.
Bus and taxi drivers strike to protest police harassment.
66 illegal immigrants stage hunger strike demanding repatriation to their countries of origin.
Rival party supporters clash over a by-election.
Illegal street traders riot against a plan to shut them down.  Rioters kill two.  Police use tear gas on the crowds.
Rival party supporters clash over a presidential election.
Thousands of voters take to the streets of Lusaka, demanding the release of results from presidential election.  Later, they accuse the ruling party of stuffing ballot boxes.  Some protesters throw rocks at police.  Police use tear gas.
Journalists strike against the Times of Zambia for better pay.  Paramilitary forces force the journalists back to work.
Pro govt. protest expressing approval of efforts against corruption.
Students from colleges nationwide protest to call on lawmakers to lift the ex-presidents immunity from prosecution for corruption.
Supporters of rival parties clash outside the Supreme Court.  Police use tear gas.  Issue of clash not specified.
4000 miners burn buildings, govt. offices, and attack a local politician to protest lost wages.  Police use tear gas.
Hundreds of Zambians, organized by opposition leaders, march to protest govt. plant to privatize three state run companies.
Lecturers strike over salaries.
2000 street traders riot when police move to shut them down.
Hundreds of workers strike around Zambia over their conditons.
Civil servants strike over higher wages and a housing allowance.  There are several large protests as part of this strike.
Students riot, smashing the headmaster's office and stealing chickens during a protest over being moved from rental houses to the dorms.
Hundreds of students riot over increase in tuition fees.  Police use teargas and gunshots.
2000 unionized health workers strike demanding housing allowances at Lusaka's biggest hospital.
Tens of thousands of Zambians stage one day general strike agaist tax hikes and wage freezes.  5000 workers march on parliament.
Lecturers strike over benefits.  Strike ends when professors agree to give up part of pay.
Lecturers strike for better benefits.
Lecturers strike for better benefits.
Zambian opposition parties hold demonstrations to push for a new democratic constitution.  Police crush the demonstration.
Zambian opposition parties hold demonstrations to push for a new democratic constitution.  Police crush the demonstration.
Zambian opposition parties hold demonstrations to push for a new democratic constitution.  Police crush the demonstration.
Zambian opposition parties hold demonstrations to push for a new democratic constitution.  Police crush the demonstration.
Public school teachers strike for better wages and benefits.
Magistrates strike for better wages and benefits.
Hundreds of mourners briefly disrupt a funeral for workers killed in a mine explosion.  Some protest against the attending Chinese delegation and the Chinese funding of the mine.  The police beat back the protesters.
Hundreds of students clash with police for better allowances.  Police use tear gas.
More than 10,000 miners strike against low wages and poor conditions.  Two days later it escalates to a riot in Chililabombwe, where the police fire tear gas.  On 7/20 there are riots at Nchanga, where police again use tear gas.
More than 10,000 miners strike against low wages and poor conditions.  Two days later it escalates to a riot in Chililabombwe, where the police fire tear gas.  On 7/20 there are riots at Nchanga, where police again use tear gas.
More than 10,000 miners strike against low wages and poor conditions.  Two days later it escalates to a riot in Chililabombwe, where the police fire tear gas.  On 7/20 there are riots at Nchanga, where police again use tear gas.
Supporters and opponents of the president clash at the ruling party's convention, assembled in advance of the presidential elections.
Soccer fans riot after Zambia loses to Senegal.  Police use tear gas.  Riots begin in town of Chililabombwe but spread to urban Kitwe.
Soccer fans riot after Zambia loses to Senegal.  Police use tear gas.  Riots begin in town of Chililabombwe but spread to urban Kitwe.
Thousands take to streets to press for a new constitution.  Organized by civic society group and opposition parties.
Local staff at the French embassy strike over poor wages.
Rival party supporters clash ahead of a by-election.
State prosecutors and govt. lawyers strike for salaries and benefits.
Students riot over the death of a comrade who was hit and killed by a car.  Police use tear gas.
Doctors strike over pay.
Strike at the University of Zambia by 500 lecturers and researchers.  On 6/24/2006, students riot to protest govt. failure to end the strike.  Police use riot gas.
Municipal workers strike over unpaid salaries.
Riot at a copper mine over company failure to pay raises.  Police fire at crowd, wounding 5.
Riots erupt at the border town of Nakonde after rumor spreads that a Tanzanian national died in police custody.
Riots occur during vote count after a presidential election.  Police use tear gas.
Shanty town residents riot after one of their fellows dies in police custody.  Police use tear gas.
Supporters of defeated presidential candidate Michael Sata attend a series of mass rallies protesting against the govt.
ZCMT workers protest ouside the Chinese embassy to complain over poor wages, mistreatment, and closure of the plant.
Miners strike over pay dispute, also demonstrate at Kitwe.  Miners strike at Chambishi.
Miners strike over pay dispute, also demonstrate at Kitwe.  Miners strike at Chambishi.
Students riot for several days over govt. failure to negotiate with their lecturers.  Police use tear gas.
Students riot at Coppberbelt University over delay in allowance payment.
Students boycott class over poor sanitation conditions.  Escalates to protests.
Lecturers strike over pay issues.  On 7/23 students riot to protest ongoing strike by their lecturers.  Police use tear gas.
Miners strike over pay and working conditions.
Rival party supporters clash over a by-election.
Zambian workers begin strike over pay.  They then riot and clash with Chinese workers, taking Chinese managers hostage.  The hostages are released and the Zambians are fired.
Hundreds of women demonstrate agains the use of prostitutes at an exclusive hotel for members of parliament.
Village elders organize about 100 protesters who block the president's entry into a village over alleged govt. meddling in traditional affairs.
Students riot at University of Zambia and Copperbelt University to press for an increase in meal allowances.  Police use tear gas and live ammunition.
Students riot at University of Zambia and Copperbelt University to press for an increase in meal allowances.  Police use tear gas and live ammunition.
Lecturers strike over pay issues.  On 7/30, students riot to protest the strike.
Supporters of Michael Sata riot after he loses a presidential election.  Police use tear gas.
600 public sector doctors strike for higher wages for two weeks.
Rival protesters clash outside the trial of a newspaper editor.  The protest escalates into a scuffle, and the police disperse the riot.
Riot police storm the University of Zambia campus to break up a violent protest by 500 students protesting overdue meal allowances.
A mass of people honk the horns of their cars to protest the acquital of former president Frederick Chiluba on corruption charges.
Miners protest against poor working conditions at a Chinese run coal mine.  Chinese managers open fire.
Thousands of Lozi (Barotse) separatists riot to demand independence.  They fight running gun battles with police.
Scattered riots occur in the capital on election day.
Riots erupt over the slow pace of election counts.
Riots erupt over the slow pace of election counts.
9 died in stampede that broke out when 5000 women and children surged toward fishing factory in search of work.
Sugar workers went on strike to demand 35% pay raise.
Youths set tires ablaze and blocked roads after army campaign to hire cadet officers resulted in tens of thousands turning out for 800 openings.
Journalists and other workers at state-run Times of Zambia went on strike to demand unpaid salaries from previous month.
Miners went on strike to protest delays in implementing new minimum wage.
Miners and villagers killed Chinese manager by hitting him with a trolley during a riot over demands for new minimum wage. Manager's colleague and another person injured in riot.
Opposition rally took place in Lusaka slum, police blocked supporters from going to rally. Event considered illegal according to police.
Journalists protest over loss of food subsidies
Church group meet to protest food price rise, pro government gang attacked the church
Environmentalists gather to protest the government giving a mining license to a company to operate in Lower Zambezi National Park.
Football players hold a three-day sit-in to protest unpaid allowances.
People riot when the white acting President attempts to fire the ruling party chief.
Workers were demanding 5 months of unpaid salaries. 
Hichilema activists were awaiting results of an election (seemingly peacefully).
Patriotic Front supporters were celebrating their party's victory in the presidential election, but were dispersed by tear gas as they tried to enter government buildings. 
Mine owner Barrick Gold announced the suspension of operations at the mine because of the government increased a minerals rights levy from 6% to 20% despite copper prices falling, presumably removing nearly 4,000 jobs. 
Disabled workers stage a sit-in after the workshop they were employed in temporarily shut down.
Nurses strike demanding increased pay.
Teachers strike.
Students protest over plans to give the central government greater control over the university.
Students strike over legislation which gives greater control over the university to the central government.
Air traffic controllers strike demanding better pay and working conditions.
Members of the Zimbabwe Unity Movement demonstrate demanding an independent commission be established to investigate disqualification of opposition candidates.
University students protest to bring attention to the lack of human rights protections in their country.
University students protest demanding increased grants from the government.
University students protest tuition increases.
Civilians demonstrate to show support for a land nationalization plan.
Laboratory technicians strike demanding increased pay.
Doctors in state run hospitals strike to show support for lab technicians who were suspended by the government after striking for increased pay.
Posts and Telecommunications workers strike demanding a 12.5% pay increase that was awarded to them by a labor tribunal.
Members of the ruling ZANU-PF party prevent opposition party ZUM members from holding a rally by setting fire to equipment.
Ruling party members clash with opposition supporters attempting to hold a rally.
Bank workers strike demanding increase in wages.
Construction workers strike demanding pay increases.
Aircraft engineer strike demanding pay increases.
Black university students take over a white night club in an attempt to end racism.
Demonstrators protest racism against blacks from banks and white owned firms.
Ruling party members protest procedures for primary elections.
Opposition party members protest electoral laws.
University students protest over decreases in government grants.
University students, lecturers and staff protest demanding the removal of several senior administrators for corruption and mismanagement.
University students protest outside the magistrate court to show support for fellow students arrest during demonstrations.
University students bomb university offices in an attempt to destroy records.
Civilians protest anti-gay remarks made by President Mugabe.
Human rights groups and students protest the shooting of two bystanders during a police chase.
Opposition United Parties protest the inauguration of President Mugabe to a sixth term claiming the elections were undemocratic.
University students riot after food prices increase.
Trade unionist demonstrate against World Bank backed economic policies which have caused high taxation, price increases, unemployment and loss of subsidies.
Trade unionist demonstrate against World Bank backed economic policies which have caused high taxation, price increases, unemployment and loss of subsidies.
Trade unionist demonstrate against World Bank backed economic policies which have caused high taxation, price increases, unemployment and loss of subsidies.
Trade unionist demonstrate against World Bank backed economic policies which have caused high taxation, price increases, unemployment and loss of subsidies.
Trade unionist demonstrate against World Bank backed economic policies which have caused high taxation, price increases, unemployment and loss of subsidies.
Trade unionist demonstrate against World Bank backed economic policies which have caused high taxation, price increases, unemployment and loss of subsidies.
Technical college students protest demanding increases in state grants.
Anti-gay protesters prevent gay rights activists from participating in a book fair.
Civil servants strike demanding pay increase between 60 and 100 percent.
Hospital staff strike demanding shorter work weeks, higher wages and better living conditions.
Opposition United Parties march to show support for striking hospital staff and to denounce the Mugabe regime.
Trade unions march to show support for striking hospital staff.
Army recruits riot when they learn there are no jobs available for them.
Airline pilots strike demanding wage increases.
University students protest and riot over higher fees.  Students also boycotted classes for several days during this time period.
Employees in the clothing, textile, bank, railway and construction fields strike demanding increased pay.
War veterans protest due to corruption in the central government that is preventing them from receiving pensions promised to them.
Farmer workers strike demanding pay increases, strike turns to rioting after pay negotiations deadlock.
University students boycott classes to demand increased government grants, boycott turned violent when police prevented students from marching out of the campus.
War veterans demonstrate outside a court hearing investigating the looting of the war victim's compensation fund.
Civilians strike over increased taxes to fun the war veterans pension fund.  Strike turns violent when police attempt to break up demonstrations.
Air traffic controllers strike demanding better pay and working conditions.
Civilians protest against soaring food prices.
Civilians protest against soaring food prices.
Civilians protest against soaring food prices.
Civilians protest against soaring food prices.
Civilians protest against soaring food prices.
Civilians strike over increasing taxes and food prices.
University students protest demanding increased grants and resignation of the President Mugabe for human rights violations and bad economic policies.
University students protest demanding increased grants and resignation of the President Mugabe for human rights violations and bad economic policies.
Civilians march to show support for President Mugabe and the ruling party.
The Global March Against Child Labour travels through Zimbabwe to attention to the problems of child labor.
The Global March Against Child Labour travels through Zimbabwe to attention to the problems of child labor.
The Global March Against Child Labour travels through Zimbabwe to attention to the problems of child labor.
University students and workers strike to demand increased grants and allowances and protest the privatization of housing and catering.
University students march to protest police brutality.
Tobacco farmers strike, withholding their product to protest low market prices.
Postal workers strike demanding wage increases.
Former exiles march demanding gratutities and monthly pensions for their role in the war for independence.
University students stage a sit-in outside Parliament demanding the resignation of President Mugabe and all corrupt politicians.
University students protest the closing of the university after anti-government demonstrations.
University students protest the closing of the university after anti-government demonstrations.
University students protest the closing of the university after anti-government demonstrations.
University students protest the closing of the university after anti-government demonstrations.
Municipal workers riot over delays in receiving pay.
Civilians protest sending armed forces to intervene in the DRC conflict.
Commuter transport workers strike to protest increase in the price of fuel, strike escalated when workers were stranded.
Commuter transport workers strike to protest increase in the price of fuel, strike escalated when workers were stranded.
Commuter transport workers strike to protest increase in the price of fuel, strike escalated when workers were stranded.
Civilians hold weekly strikes over fuel price increases.
Demonstrators protest President Mugabe's authoritarian rule.
Gay rights activists protest the central government's criminalization of homosexuality.
Civilians protest the detention of a newspaper editor and the countries military involvement in the DRC.
Civilians protest over the torture of journalists and to demand a return to democracy.
University students protest over non-payment of grants, military involvement in the DRC and freedom of press violations.
Railway workers strike when the National Railways of Zimbabwe announced it did not have funds to pay backdated allowances.
Civilians protest against the FBI, CIA and President Clinton after three Americans were arrest on charges of being mercenaries sent to assasinate President Mugabe.
University students protest against a government ordered five month vacation.
Postal and telecommunications workers strike demanding pay increases.
Telecommunications engineers strike demanding pay raises.
Women protest a court decision that women should not be considered adults within a family.
Government workers strike demanding pay increases.
City workers strike demanding increased pay.
War veterans and former political prisoners protest demanding compensation for their roles in the liberation war.
Hotel and resteraunt employees strike to demand better pay and working conditions.
State-employed doctors strike to demand better working conditions and salary reviews.
University students protest over late payment of allowances.
Nurses strike demanding better pay and working conditions.
National Constitutional Assembly march in protest of the newly drafter constitution which will give President Mugabe greater autocratic control.
Civilians fight each other and riot over scarce fuel supplies.
Ruling party supporters attack opposition supporters after a campaign rally.
Opposition leaders are accused of setting fire to an office of the ruling party ahead of referendum vote on the new constitution.
Opponents of the new constitution protest at a meeting of the Constitutional Commission.
Opponents of the proposed constitution demonstrate after the referendum failed.
War veterans invade white owned farms to protest the failure of the constitutional referendum which would have given President Mugabe the ability to confiscate farm land without providing compensation.  War veterans remained on the farm land an
Political violence leading up to elections.
ZANU-PF youth members retaliate against attack by youths associated with the white farmers.
White farmers organize youth to attack a war veterans office.
The National Constitutional Assembly organized a pray for peace meeting and march to urge President Mugabe to uphold the Supreme Court decision to evict war veterans from white owned farms.  War veterans retaliate by attacking the march in Hara
The National Constitutional Assembly organized a pray for peace meeting and march to urge President Mugabe to uphold the Supreme Court decision to evict war veterans from white owned farms.  War veterans retaliate by attacking the march in Hara
The National Constitutional Assembly organized a pray for peace meeting and march to urge President Mugabe to uphold the Supreme Court decision to evict war veterans from white owned farms.  War veterans retaliate by attacking the march in Hara
ZANU-PF members attack NCA members who voted no on the constitutional referendum held in February.
MDC members gather at the funeral of an activist who spoke against the ruling party to protest ongoing violence.
Bombing at an independent newspaper headquarters.
ZANU-PF members gather at a counter rally to show support for Mugabe.
MDC members rally claiming new police demands prevent constitutional rights of association and expression and in opposition to Mugabe's regime.
MDC members rally claiming new police demands prevent constitutional rights of association and expression and in opposition to Mugabe's regime.
MDC members rally claiming new police demands prevent constitutional rights of association and expression and in opposition to Mugabe's regime.
MDC members rally claiming new police demands prevent constitutional rights of association and expression and in opposition to Mugabe's regime.
War veterans march to show support for President Mugabe and the leader of farm occupations Chenjerai Hunzvi, who is on trial for fraud.
ZANU-PF and MDC members clash at a pro-government rally.  Violence continued on the university campus until riot police intervened and removed all students from the campus.
Women march to demand peace and an end to the ongoing racial tensions.
National Constitutional Assembly rally for peace.
MDC holds pre-election rally's to gather support, protest the Mugabe regime and demand free and fair elections.
ZANU-PF party holds pre-election rally's to maintain support for Mugabe and the ruling party in upcoming elections.
ZANU-PF supporters storm a police station to free fellow supporters jailed for political violence.
ZINASU called for student boycott of classes to protest ongoing political violence.
ZINASU called for student boycott of classes to protest ongoing political violence.
ZINASU called for student boycott of classes to protest ongoing political violence.
MDC supporters attack ZANU-PF supporters in pre-election violence.
ZANU-PF youth prevent MDC supporters from entering a football arena to attend a rally.
Rival political parties clash after election results were announced.
Police disband opposition election celebrations.
Fans of Zimbabwe's soccer team throw items onto the field after the South African team scored during the World Cup qualifying game situation escalated to a stampede after police fired tear gas into the crowd.
White farmers strike demanding police protection against the war veteran squatters who continue to live on the farmers land and threaten their lives.
White farmers strike demanding police protection against the war veteran squatters who continue to live on the farmers land and threaten their lives.
White farmers strike demanding police protection against the war veteran squatters who continue to live on the farmers land and threaten their lives.
White farmers strike demanding police protection against the war veteran squatters who continue to live on the farmers land and threaten their lives.
White farmers strike demanding police protection against the war veteran squatters who continue to live on the farmers land and threaten their lives.
Workers strike to protest the breakdown of law and order.
Commuters attack transportation workers to protest fare increases.
Unknown assailants bomb the MDC headquarters.
MDC supporters gather at the airport to show support for their leader.  Police respond with tear gas and arrests.
Citizens riot over increased food and transportation costs.
Citizens riot over increased food and transportation costs.
Citizens riot over increased food and transportation costs.
University lecturers strike demanding increased wages.  Students stage a protest in support of the strike.
Citizens riot after a police officer fatally shot an 8 month old baby while attempting to arrest street vendors who had not paid site rents.
Employees of the state-run newspapers strike demanding payment of their annual bonuses.
Opposition and ruling party supporters clash in election violence.
Civilians riot after the accidental shooting of a street vendor while police were attempting to arrest a bus driver.
Ethiopian immigrants stage a sit-down protest on the airport tarmac after being denied visas.
Ruling party militants march to protest the distribution of an independent newspaper due to anti-government statements and anti-Kabila reports.
Government workers strike demanding pay increases.
Opposition supporters prevent the circulation of the state-run newspaper by destroy copies.
Opposition supporters prevent the circulation of the state-run newspaper by destroy copies.
MDC supporters attempt to demonstrate against police harassment and lawlessness in Zimbabwe.
Journalist march to protest declining press freedoms and state harassment.
Police force their way into the home of BBC journalist, Joseph Winter, after a gang failed to gain entrance.  Winter had early been ordered by the government to leave Zimbabwe.
ZANU-PF militants attack school teachers whom they accuse of being MDC supporters.
Hospital doctors strike demanding on call pay as promised.
War veterans raid white owned and MDC linked organizations.
War veterans raid white owned and MDC linked organizations.
University students protest and riot demanding payment of allowances and improved economic situation.
Ruling party militants attack a lawyer investigating violence surrounding elections last June.
Riot police and security agents raid the MDC offices after a court decision overturning election results favoring ZANU-PF due to violence and intimidation.
ZANU-PF militants attack parliamentary candidates who have challenged election outcomes.
ZANU-PF militants attack parliamentary candidates who have challenged election outcomes.
ZANU-PF militants attack civilians in the Bindura  area to prevent them from supporting the opposition party in upcoming elections.
ZCTU supporters rally to demand higher wages and improved economic conditions.  War veteran leader Jospeh Chinotimba tried to make a speech but was stopped by MDC supporters before reaching the podium.
Opposition supporters gather outside the court house to show support for Tsvangirai.
Postal and telecommunications workers strike demanding pay increases.
Civilians protest massive fuel hikes.
Specialist doctors strike demanding increased pay.
Civilians strike over Mugabe's economic policies and fuel price hikes.
Unknown assailants bomb houses in a shanty town.
Police raid MDC offices claiming to be searching for hostages.
Police raid MDC offices claiming to be searching for hostages.
Opposition supporters march to commemorate the disappearance of opposition activist Patrick Nabanyama.
University students protest increases in university fees.
Police forces surround and fire shots into the home of opposition activist, Sekai Holland.
ZANU-PF militants attack Tsvangirai's motorcade.
Government doctors and nurses strike demanding increased pay.
ZANU-PF supporters kidnap and attack MDC supporters during a special election in Bindura.
Iron and Steel workers strike demanding pay increases.
War veterans loot and riot in Victoria Falls claiming increased cost in goods is a result of Zambian traders.
Police raid MDC offices on the first day of mayoral elections.
ZANU-PF militants attack MDC supporters and officials.
National Constitutional Assembly holds a rally to demand a new constitution to ensure democratic reform.
Civilians protest demanding the government slash prices of bread prices.
Civilians protest demanding the government slash prices of bread prices.
Farm workers strike over land occupation violence.
Newspaper street vendors protest recent arrests by police.
University students protest and riot over government proposals to make students privately fund their education.
National Constitutional Assembly staged a protest against newly proposed electoral laws that would prevent Zimbabweans living abroad from participating in elections.
Student protest over the murder of a fellow student by a soldier.
Railway workers strike over state plans to disburse holiday bonuses over a period of three months.
ZANU-PF militants march to show support for new legislation that would further restrict media.
MDC supporters attack ZANU-PF offices and officials.
Teachers refuse to work for fear of being attacked by the ruling party.
Teachers refuse to work for fear of being attacked by the ruling party.
A group of youths attack off-duty soldiers.
Supporters of the MDC were meet by ruling party militants and riot police when they attempted to gather for a pre-election rally.
Media protest new legislative amendments aimed at curbing press freedom.
Unknown assailants attack the office of Zimbabwe's only independent newspaper, The Daily Newspaper.  It is assumed that the bombings occurred because the paper had print opposition election campaign material.
Unknown assailants attack the office of Zimbabwe's only independent newspaper, The Daily Newspaper.  It is assumed that the bombings occurred because the paper had print opposition election campaign material.
National Constitutional Assembly supporters march to demand a new constitution and in protest of ongoing political violence.
ZANU-PF members march to protest opposition supporters and the British government, claiming they have provided support for the MDC.
Election observers are attacked by ZANU-PF supporters after observing opposition rallies.
Election observers are attacked by ZANU-PF supporters after observing opposition rallies.
Election observers are attacked by ZANU-PF supporters after observing opposition rallies.
Angry voters storm a polling station after waiting hours to vote in the presidential election.
Riot police forcibly remove voters from polling stations during the presidential election.
ZANU-PF militants attack supporters of MDC.
Civilians strike over undemocratic presidential elections and ongoing political violence.
ZANU-PF supporters demonstrate against recently elected MDC Mayor Elias Mudzuri.
MDC supporters demonstrate in response to a protest by ZANU-PF supporters against the recent election of MDC mayor Elias Mudzuri.
Militia members attack civilians after not receive the financial support they demanded.  Citizens respond by rioting and attacking the militia base.
Civilians demonstrate to demand democratic change and in protest of fraudulent presidential elections.  Police blockades prevented the majority of civilians from reaching protest meeting points.
Civilians demonstrate to demand democratic change and in protest of fraudulent presidential elections.  Police blockades prevented the majority of civilians from reaching protest meeting points.
Civilians demonstrate to demand democratic change and in protest of fraudulent presidential elections.  Police blockades prevented the majority of civilians from reaching protest meeting points.
Civilians demonstrate to demand democratic change and in protest of fraudulent presidential elections.  Police blockades prevented the majority of civilians from reaching protest meeting points.
Civilians protest against the Mugabe regime.
Civilians protest against the Mugabe regime.
Civilians protest against the Mugabe regime.
Civilians protest against the Mugabe regime.
Civilians protest against the Mugabe regime.
Farmers protest foreign exchange rates they say are caused by international traders.
Opposition supporters gather to celebration the 1976 Soweto uprising in South Africa that helped bring democracy to the region.
Doctors strike demanding increased pay.
Soccer fans riot after a soccer match in which they claim the referee did not allow their team enough injury team causing them to loose the game.
ZANU-PF militants bomb the office of an independent radio station that has been critical of the Mugabe regime.
Police raid the offices of the human rights group Amani Trust and removed documentation of the political violence occurring the past several years.
ZANU-PF militants assault several MDC candidates and supporters during campaigning and elections.
Teachers strike demanding increased pay.
Students protest the firing of hundreds of teachers that participated in a strike over pay increases.
National Constitutional Assembly staged protests to demand a new democratic constitution.
National Constitutional Assembly staged protests to demand a new democratic constitution.
National Constitutional Assembly staged protests to demand a new democratic constitution.
National Constitutional Assembly staged protests to demand a new democratic constitution.
Civilians protest after a deputy headmaster accused of rape was released on bail and allowed to go back to work.
National Constitutional Assembly called for a general strike to demand a new democratic constitution.
Newspaper staff strike.  It is suspected the government has forced the staff into striking to stop the independent newspaper from reporting.
Civilians riot while waiting for scarce food to be distributed.
Civilians riot while waiting for scarce food to be distributed.
Unknown assailant bomb ruling party offices.  The government blames MDC for the attack but the opposition group denies any involvement.
Few civilians strike over Mugabe's economic policies and shortage of food supplies.
Police fire tear gas into an opposition dominated municipal council meeting to discuss water issues.  Police claimed the meeting was being held illegally.
Police forcibly remove spectators from observing the trial of opposition leaders accused of plotting to murder Pres. Mugabe even though the judge had permitted their entrance.
MDC supporters demonstrate against Nigeria's perceived support of the Mugabe regime.
Police raid a meeting of the Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition claiming it was an illegal gathering.  The meeting was to discuss the role of the church in the political and economic crisis.
The Women of Zimbabwe Arise peacefully march to demand an end to the political violence.
The Women of Zimbabwe Arise peacefully march to demand an end to the political violence.
Soccer fans at the World Cup protest ongoing political violence.
Soccer fans at the World Cup protest ongoing political violence.
Pastors march to protest state sponsored violence.
Women march to commemorate United Nations' International Women's Day demanding rights for women and food for their children.
Women march to commemorate United Nations' International Women's Day demanding rights for women and food for their children.
Women march to protest the trial of MDC leader Morgan Tsvangirai accused of treason.
ZANU-PF militants attack MDC supporters while they attempt to hold a rally.
Soldiers beat up farm workers on a farm leased by an opposition legislator.
Civilians strike to protest ongoing violence and economic policies of Pres. Mugabe.
Soldiers, police and ZANU-PF militants violently retaliate against civilians participating in the recently strike or suspected of being MDC supporters.
Unknown assailants bomb ZANU-PF offices.
Civilians protest against the Harare opposition led city government claiming it has not managed the city well and several suburbs have no access to clean water.
Civilians strike demanding the immediate reversal of fuel price increases.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise organize a march to commemorate Mother's Day and demand peace in their country.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise organize a march to commemorate Mother's Day and demand peace in their country.
Electrical engineers strike demand wage increases.
Opposition supporters protest and strike demanding democratic reform and an end to political violence.
Riot police violently broke up an annual public speaking competition organized by Innocent Ncube claiming the organization was illegal.
MDC supporters protest against the Mugabe regime.
Civilians riot at banks when they are unable to cash their checks due a lack of cash on hand.
University lecturers strike demanding increased wages.  Students stage a protest in support of the strike.
National Constitutional Assembly supporters protest government closure of the only independent newspaper.
Trade unionist protest over failing economy.
Trade unionist protest over failing economy.
Trade unionist protest over failing economy.
Trade unionist protest over failing economy.
Trade unionist protest over failing economy.
Trade unionist protest over failing economy.
MDC employees are shot by a single gunman for unknown reasons.
National Constitutional Assembly supporters protest to demand political reform.
Doctors strike demanding increased pay.
University students riot after being told they would not receiving past due living allowances.
Trade unionist protest to demand that taxes and prices are not raised.
Trade unionist protest to demand that taxes and prices are not raised.
Trade unionist protest to demand that taxes and prices are not raised.
Trade unionist protest to demand that taxes and prices are not raised.
Air traffic controllers strike demanding better pay.
ZANU-PF militants fire shots outside a polling station to scare off opposition supporters.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise protest against high food prices and shortages.
Human rights lawyers demonstrate demanding protecting for lawyers and judges against torture and harassment.
Riot police shut down the independent newspaper printing plant and offices despite court rulings allowing the paper to continue publishing.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise organize marches to mark International Women's Day.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise organize marches to mark International Women's Day.
Clashes between ZANU-PF militants and opposition supporters during parliamentary by-election.
Senior cricket players strike over the firing of captain Heath Streak later strikes held over unpaid match fees.
National Constitutional Assembly supporters demonstrate demanding a new constitution.
Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions holds a rally to demand tax cuts and increased worker's rights.
Police raid a hotel where an NCA meeting was to take place to discuss possible changes to the constitution.
ZANU-PF militants violently protest outside parliament and opposition offices to demand the expulsion of an opposition representative for fighting with government ministers.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise hold demonstrations to mark World Refugee Day and bring attention to Zimbabweans who live like refugees.
ZANU-PF militants attack a meeting of MDC officials discussing preparations for upcoming parliamentary elections.
National Constitutional Assembly protest over new government restrictions on non-governmental associations.
Police are accused of using excessive force and tear gas to evict civilians living in a shanty town outside Harare.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise demonstrate to demand South Africa place greater pressure on Mugabe to make political and economic reforms.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise organize a peace march from Bulawayo to Harare to demand political and democratic reforms.  Police disperse the march just before the women arrived in Harare.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise organize a peace march from Bulawayo to Harare to demand political and democratic reforms.  Police disperse the march just before the women arrived in Harare.
Postal and telecommunications workers strike over unpaid pay increases.
MDC supporters gather outside MDC office to show support for Tsvangirai after a court ruled he was innocent of treason charges.
Roy Bennett supporters protest the Zimbabwe-English cricket match claiming there should be no cricket until Bennett is released from jail.  Bennett is a legislator arrested for shoving another politician in November.
A faction of the ZANU-PF party protest the selection of candidates for upcoming parliamentary elections claiming the candidates have been imposed upon them.
Violence and intimidation were reported during between ZANU-PF factions during the ruling party's primary elections.
Police harassment of MDC supporters ahead of elections.
ZANU-PF militants attack MDC supporters and police officers in pre-election violence.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise march for the power of love and peace.
National Constitutional Assembly supporters march to demand free and fair elections.
Soldiers assault MDC candidates returning from an election rally.
Members of ZCTU enter and break up a meeting of ZCTU leaders, the purpose of the demonstration is unclear.
Women are arrested after holding a prayer vigil on election day.
Youth opposition supporters stage a brief demonstration to demand new parliamentary elections.
Demonstrators clash with police.  Reason for the demonstration is unknown.
Civilians riot and clash with police after police remove street vendors and burn shanty town homes in an effort to clean up the city.
Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions call for a general strike to protest the government crack down on street vendors and shanty towns.
State doctors strike over low pay and fuel allowances.
Opposition lawmakers protest constitutional overhaul which will curb property rights and civil liberties.
White farmers continue to be harassed, tortured and evicted from their farms despite government claims that land seizures have ended.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise protest against recent demolitions of shanty towns that have left hundreds of thousands homeless.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise protest against recent demolitions of shanty towns that have left hundreds of thousands homeless.
Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions organize protest march to demand living wages, protections for workers and better access to health care.
Members of rival MDC factions clash after some parliament members follow Tsvangirai's order to boycott parliament while others do not.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise organize protest march to against human rights violations and to demand access to food supplies and an end to political violence in the country.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise protest to demand lower school fees.
MDC youth militants loyal to Tsvangirai attack an MDC lawmaker who is loyal to the rival faction led by Arthur Mutambara.
National Constitutional Assembly organized protest marches to demand a new constitution.
National Constitutional Assembly organized protest marches to demand a new constitution.
National Constitutional Assembly organized protest marches to demand a new constitution.
Medical interns strike demanding pay increases.
Residents of Harare march to demand mayoral elections after Mugabe removed the previous mayor from office.
Tsvangirai led a march to protest the political and economic climate in Zimbabwe.
Doctors strike demanding increased pay.
Teachers stage a sit-in and refuse to teach demanding pay increases and better working conditions.
Students protest increases in tuition fees.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise stage demonstrations demanding social justice and democratic reform.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise stage demonstrations demanding social justice and democratic reform.
MDC party attempted to hold a rally to announce Tsvangarai's presidential candidacy.
University lecturers strike demanding increased wages.
University lecturers strike demanding increased wages.
University lecturers strike demanding increased wages.
Save Zimbabwe Campaign organized a prayer meeting that was broken up by policing claiming it was an illegal meeting.
Police shoot opposition activist attending the funeral of a fellow activist who was shot and killed on March 11 by police.
MDC supporters accused of bombing police camps, a passenger train and supermarket.
MDC supporters accused of bombing police camps, a passenger train and supermarket.
MDC supporters accused of bombing police camps, a passenger train and supermarket.
MDC supporters accused of bombing police camps, a passenger train and supermarket.
Police raid night clubs and arrest youth in an alleged attempt to prevent dissent.
Nationwide strike held in protest of current economic conditions.
Save Zimbabwe Campaign held organized pro-democracy prayer meeting.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise stage a pro-democracy demonstration.
Lawyers protest against the arrest of two colleagues.
Doctors strike demanding increased pay.
Doctors strike demanding increased pay.
Police raid MDC headquarters to break up a routine party meeting to discuss party issues.
University students protest the governments decision to charge them additional fees to make up for lost time during lecturer strike and to deny food to those students refusing to pay the additional fees.
ZCTU call for nationwide strike to demand economic reform.  The strike received mixed responses.
Teachers strike demanding increased pay.
Magistrates and state prosecutors strike demanding pay increases.
Doctors and nurses strike demanding increased pay.
MDC supporters march to a rally to support Tsvangirai in the presidential elections and demand democratic reforms.
Teachers at state-run school strike demanding increased pay, housing and transportation costs.
Former bishop Kunonga of the Anglican church supporters block entrance to the church in protest over the appointment of the new bishop, Bakare.
ZANU-PF parliamentary candidate's homes are bombed by unknown assailants.
ZANU-PF militants attack independent election observers after the end of the presidential election.
ZANU-PF militants have torch homes of opposition supporters and engaged in general violence  and torture after the conclusion of elections.
Police raid MDC office and journalist headquarters.
War veterans march to show support for President Mugabe.
ZANU-PF militants invade white-owned farms and force owners off their land.
MDC calls for a general strike to demand the release of presidential election results.
Police raid the MDC headquarters, arresting and beating several hundred opposition members.
Police raid offices of independent election observers.
Tobacco farmers protest state imposed price controls by refusing to sell their crop and tearing up bails.
Police prevent Christians from gathering to worship.
MDC supporters are accused of attacking and killing ZANU-PF activists.
Women gather to pray  for peace during the upcoming presidential run-off.
War veterans attack US and British diplomats as they return from investigating political violence in northern Zimbabwe.
MDC supporters hold rallies to show support for Tsvangirai in the upcoming presidential run-off election.  ZANU-PF militants and police prevented a rally in Bulawayo from happening.  Youth ZANU-PF violently attempt to disband MDC supporters.
MDC supporters hold rallies to show support for Tsvangirai in the upcoming presidential run-off election.  ZANU-PF militants and police prevented a rally in Bulawayo from happening.  Youth ZANU-PF violently attempt to disband MDC supporters.
ZANU-PF militants attack white farmers in post presidential run-off election violence.
War veterans invade a wildlife conservancy demanding the owners vacate the property.
Unknown assailants bomb railway station and bridges between Harare and Bulawayo.
Teachers strike demanding increased pay.
Ruling party and opposition supporters riot outside the convention center where Tsvangaria and Mugabe sign the power sharing agreement.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise demonstrate demanding a solution to the power sharing agreement so the government can begin to address the food crisis.
Women protest outside the hotel where leaders were meeting to discuss cabinet power sharing demanding an agreement.
Crisis of Zimbabwe Coalition march to demand leaders come to a cabinet power sharing agreement.
ZANU-PF militants attack opposition supporters due to the inability to produce a power sharing agreement between the parties.
National Constitutional Assembly organized nationwide protest marches to demand a transitional government and new elections.
Doctors and nurses strike and protest to demand funding for the collapsing health care system.
Soldiers riot after they are unable to withdraw money from banks due to the failing economy.
The Air Force Chief is attacked after government accused of training assassins.
City workers strike demanding to be paid in foreign currency due to extreme inflation of Zimbabwean currency.
War veterans seize land owned by white farmers.
Women of Zimbabwe Arise hold marches to bring attention to Zimbabwean refugees.
ZANU-PF and war veteran leaders protest a meeting between Mugabe and Tsvangirai to discuss the new constitution.
Zimbabwe National Students Union held a rally to protest a decision to increase tuition fees.
Doctors strike demanding increased pay.
Teachers strike demanding increased pay.
Members of the constitution committee have gone on strike to demand payment of their salaries.
Students march to protest high tuition.
At least 4000 Anglicans hold an open air protest service to complain about police harassment.
Hundreds of thousands of civil servants strike and demonstrate for higher pay.
A small group of women protest against power outages and prices.  The women are arrested.
25,000 miners strike against an employer association for higher pay.
Police raid an office of GALZ and arrest several members of the organization.
Mugabe loyalists loot white farms.  A black farm foreman is beaten by white farmers.
A drunken mob invades a farm owned by a German national, holding the managers hostage in their homes.
Pilots strike at Harere airport for higher wages.
About 300 teachers protest to demand higher pay.
Dozens of Zanu-PF supporters hurl stones into a meeting of delegates negotiating a new constitution.
600 activists march against police misconduct.  Many are beaten and arrested.
Youths and women chanting pro-Mugabe/ZANU-PF slogans storm the MDC-led Harare city council.  Armed riot police stand by and do not intervene.
Supporters of ZANU-PF raid and loot a tourist facility.
Pro-government thugs ransack and set fire to an MDC district official's office.
Mobs supporting the Prime Minister's party surround offices of the president's party; mobs supporting the president attack the pro-MDF city council.
Pro-government mobs chant slogans as they roam a township, assaulting residents and storming homes, while demanding the lifting of Western economic sanctions.
Protesters chanting slogans from the ZANU-PF trash stalls owned by hawkers from elsewhere in Africa at a flea market, looting phones, electronics, and clothing.  This occurs after the pro-Tsvangirai city council awards a car parking contract to a South African firm.
A protest group manages to get through a police blockade to deliver messages calling for peaceful reform at the parliament building.  Police ignore shouted orders to attack with tear gas and batons.
Followers of a pro-Mugabe, excommunicated Anglican bishop kill one person and wound others in an attack on Anglicans that refuse to support the bishop.
Thousands organized by the ruling party rally against Western sanctions.
Police raid and arrest members of an opposition political party as they were meeting to discuss what they could learn from the North African uprisings.
Pilots strike over pay and allowances.
Police and youths attack a ceremony held in honor of slain opposition party activists.
The Christian Alliance group organizes a daylong vigil to pray for peace.  They are attacked by police with tear gas.
Teachers strike for higher wages, and for the security of teachers who are victims of political violence in rural areas.
Pilots strike over pay and allowances.
State prosecutors strike for higher pay.
Police try to confiscate vendor's wares when a gospel choir claims the vendors sell illegal copies of their music.  The police then begin a tear-gassing spree through the capital, and then target MDC headquarters.
Pro-government youths attack an MDC rally.
Civil servants engaged in partially-observed strike to demand doubling of basic wages, some schools closed while government offices remained open.
Civil servants engaged in partially-observed strike to demand doubling of basic wages, some schools closed while government offices remained open.
Organization conducted march to call for end to violence and political unrest, promote efforts at reconciliation between political foes. March broken up by police.
Party infighting led to the death of party member.
Six policemen were accused of beating a mineworker to death during a theft investigation.
Supporters gathered outside courthouse during sentencing of activists convicted of conspiring to commit violence for watching video of protests, several activists arrested.
 attacked MDC-T members during a rally, MDC-T supporter stoned to death in attack. Police did not take action to stop attack.
Supporters of PM's party gathered outside court to protest charges against former opposition activists, police fired tear gas and arrested an official. Demonstrators scuffled with police.
Biti's home was attacked with gasoline bomb during period of austerity measures.
Government workers demonstrated demanding a near doubling of basic wages.
Villagers and nurses demonstrated outside hospital to demand reinstatement of fired Canadian doctor, church vehicle was overturned. Police fired tear gas and made arrests.
Police assaulted and detained 44 members of GALZ during raid as they convened to launch report on gay rights violations.
Mini-bus solicitors who enjoy relative impunity due to ties to President Mugabe's party beat two soldiers.
Police indiscriminately carried out random beatings and whippings as they sought to arrest solicitors with ties to Mugabe who had clashed with police and army.
About 20 soldiers engaged in revenge attacks after mini-bus solicitors who enjoy relative impunity due to Mugabe ties beat two soldiers.
Militants from ZANU-PF party tried to invade and barricaded his office demanding his resignation over war veteran salary and pension issues.
Violent mobs and Malema's bodyguards violently jostled journalists trying to meet him during visit to Zimbabwe.
Mugabe supporters prevent US envoy from giving a speech
Pro women group demonstrates for women's rights and access to resources
Pro women group demonstrates for women's rights and access to resources
ZANU-PF supporters firebombed officials for MDC
MDC demonstrate police crackdowns
Zanu-PF supporters attacked MDC canvassing group
ZANU-PF kidnapped oppsition figure
ZANU-PF arrested opposition figures
ZANU-PF attacked MDC members while campaigning
Miners' wives protest the non-payment of their husbands work
Depositors rush bank after there is a run on cash
Cricketers stage a sit-in and strike again over unpaid wages and bonuses.
A party member is beat up by youths, perhaps due to his request for the leader to step down.
An opposition party leader's house is attacked with a petrol bomb.
Two people are murdered, potentially over land issues.
Youths protest calling for the president to create jobs.
MDC members protest, demanding jobs.
Youths fight each other during protests and rallies for the president's wife who will likely play a role in choosing his successor.
Youths fight each other during protests and rallies for the president's wife who will likely play a role in choosing his successor.
Police are filmed beating street vendors and then attack and arrest the journalist who recorded the incident.
Junior doctors strike over demands for wage increases.
Prisoners were rioting over food rations and quality. 
A human rights activist was abducted -- the central government is accused of the crime-- and protesters were calling for his release and the resignation of Mugabe. 
Prisoners were protesting the quality of their lunches. 
Students and staff were protesting against unpaid salaries for lecturers. 
Workers were protesting against the bad economy and proposed salary and job cuts for civil workers. 
Protesters in Zimbabwe were protesting the violence Zimbabweans face in South Africa. 
Nurses are striking and not working the night shift in Zimbabwe over a dispute about wages. 
Vendors have been told to remove their stalls from streets and squares in Harare, but are protesting that their livelihoods depend on these stalls since the weakened economy has left them no other options. 
Conservation groups were protesting against the exportation of 20 elephants to Chinese zoos. 
Protesters were calling for the release of activist Itai Dzamara who was arrested by the government for unknown reasons. 
Protesters were about to riot against the closing of street-front shops and other job losses, but riot police prevent the riot from occurring. 
A human rights group, describing Malawi as despotic and brutally repressive, said today that police there killed more than 20 protesters in a previously unreported massacre.
Zimbabwe's human rights watch group and trade unions on Wednesday protested the arrest and detention without trial of a promininent Malawi opposition politician Chifukwa Chihana and five others.
Malawi's only university has been closed following protests by staff and students, western diplomats said Wednesday.
Malawi's only university has been closed following protests by staff and students, western diplomats said Wednesday.
protesters demanding democratic reforms and higher wages fought bloody battles with police in Malawi for the second day today, leaving 38 people dead in the country's worst unrest, diplomats and hospital officials said.
protesters demanding democratic reforms and higher wages fought bloody battles with police in Malawi for the second day today, leaving 38 people dead in the country's worst unrest, diplomats and hospital officials said.
On Thursday around 3,000 people gathered outside the High Court in the capital Lilongwe where Chihana was due to appear to face charges of sedition.
Kanyanya said that since anti-government riots in May in which up to 38 people died, 40 more people had been killed and more than 2,000 detained.
A relative of a prominent political prisoner in Malawi has been arrested himself after appealing publicly for the release of his father-in-law, Western diplomats said Sunday.
Pro-democracy activist Chakufwa Chihana was freed on bail Tuesday in Malawi after months in detention without trial on sedition charges, his lawyers said.
A group of opposition demonstrators were remanded on bail until February 1 on charges of unlawful assembly when they appeared in a Malawi court Wednesday.
Malawi police Sunday cancelled a big opposition rally, to the fury of thousands of multi-party advocates who had converged at a Blantyre stadium in the wake of a referendum that backed multi -party democracy.
Workers at Malawi's state electricity supply firm, who had threatened to cut off supplies to the entire country if their demands for a 95 percent pay rise were not met, Monday staged a peaceful demonstration instead.
City council staff meanwhile are in the second week of a strike demanding a 150 percent pay rise.
Since the strikes began on Monday, patients at Malawi's biggest hospital here have been left to fend for themselves as about 200 junior staff went on strike for more money and better conditions.
Malawi's President Kamuzu Banda ordered air traffic controllers and the fire brigade from the army to assist with duties at the country's two international airports Sunday as a nationwide strike by most of Malawi's 105,000 civil servants entere
A man was shot dead Wednesday when police opened fire on strikers at a sugar factory owned by the Lonrho multinational in Malawi's Chikwawa district, hospital sources said.
Violence and looting erupted in the capital of Malawi on Friday when soldiers and members of the government's paramilitary youth group clashed, witnesses said. Unconfirmed reports said up to 20 people had died.
Clashes in Malawi between soldiers and members of the government's paramilitary youth group killed as many as 20 people and unleashed widespread looting in the capital Friday, witnesses said.
A crack police unit saved Home Affairs Minister Gwanda Chakuamba from stoning by members of the opposition United Democratic Front party after he addressed a rally of the ruling Malawi Congress Party, witnesses said Tuesday.
Malawi's 40,000 primary school teachers on Tuesday went on a nationwide strike demanding the government to pay them salary arrears dating back to 1992.
Striking civil servants shut down Malawi's capital Monday to protest economic reforms that have decimated their buying power.
Asian traders closed their shops for the second straight day here Thursday in fear of striking shop assistants demanding pay increases.
Aged former dictator Kamuzu Banda, who ruled Malawi with an iron fist for 30 years, was put under house arrest Thursday and will face trial within weeks for the 1983 murder of four political rivals.
The murder trial of ousted dictator Dr. Kamuzu Banda won't start for weeks, but thousands of Malawians who demonstrated at the High Court Wednesday already have found him guilty.
The returnees, who have accused the 10-month-old government of Bakili Muluzi, of ignoring their plight, Tuesday staged a peaceful protest march in the capital Lilongwe and petitioned the government to speed up their resettlement and rehabilitat
Outside the courthouse, officials of Banda's Malawi Congress Party persuaded several hundred of his supporters to break up a noisy protest during which they had demanded the deaths of prosecutors.
Many of Malawi's 105,000 civil servants on Thursday began an indefinite strike demanding payment of restructured salaries backdated to April.
The pupils want Muluzi to intervene to end the strike after Malawi's education authorities failed to resolve the growing problem. More teachers walked off the job this week in solidarity with colleagues who had their pay withheld after striking
Hundreds of angry Malawi primary school pupils staged a protest march on Friday to President Bakili Muluzi's residence to demand he end a teachers strike, littering the road to the palace with mango peels.
Senior British defence lawyer Clive Stanbrook was raised shoulder high as celebrations also broke out in the streets of city, which took on a carnival atmosphere as heavily-armed riot police with dogs tried to maintain control.
The run-up to the by-election saw bloody clashes between supporters of the ruling United Democratic Front of President Bakili Muluzi and the main opposition Malawi Congress Party of ex-president Hastings Kamuzu Banda.
After the hearing police struggled to prevent about 100 banner-waving supporters of Banda's opposition Malawi Congress Party from invading court precincts. They were chanting support for the three accused.
The Malawi government Wednesday declared a strike by civil servants illegal and said a number of strikers had been arrested.
At least 10 soldiers raided a newspaper office and smashed computer, photographic and printing equipment, evidently to protest ''negative'' reporting on the military, the owners said Friday.
A group of more than 100 ruling party supporters stormed the offices of a newspaper owned by the opposition Malawi Congress Party and threatened staff with knives and clubs, the newspaper reported Friday.
The Malawi Congress of Trade Unions (MCTU) admitted that a national strike called for Wednesday had failed.
Last August, nine former bodyguards of President Bakili Muluzi were briefly detained after staging a protest outside his palace, saying they also were owed back pay.
Hundreds of street vendors rioted in the streets of a satellite shopping town outside Malawi's commercial capital Blantyre, protesting hikes in the prices of petrol and maize.
Five supporters of Malawi's opposition Alliance for Democracy (Aford) were arrested by police after they threw stones at a rally for President Bakili Muluzi in northern Karonga district.
Opposition supporters in Malawi have burned down several mosques and houses belonging to members of the ruling United Democratic Front (UDF) in continuing post-election violence, witnesses said Sunday.
Opposition supporters in Malawi have burned down several mosques and houses belonging to members of the ruling United Democratic Front (UDF) in continuing post-election violence, witnesses said Sunday.
Opposition supporters, alleging vote rigging, went on a rampage Friday in northern Malawi after unofficial results in the nation's elections gave President Bakili Muluzi an edge, police said.
Opposition supporters, alleging vote rigging, went on a rampage Friday in northern Malawi after unofficial results in the nation's elections gave President Bakili Muluzi an edge, police said.
Opposition supporters, alleging vote rigging, went on a rampage Friday in northern Malawi after unofficial results in the nation's elections gave President Bakili Muluzi an edge, police said.
Two journalists from Malawi's main opposition Daily Times newspaper, were arrested at the weekend over a story calling on the military to oust President Bakili Muluzi's re-elected government.
Police opened fire Saturday with live ammunition to disperse a crowd of political opposition supporters in northern Malawi, wounding six people, hospital officials said.
Scores of opposition supporters were injured or arrested when riot police broke up a protest against the results of the June 15 elections, narrowly won by President Bakili Muluzi's ruling party.
An Eritrean who died in the custody of Malawian officials at the weekend was killed by gunshots, a government official charged here Monday, contradicting Malawi's explanation of the death.
The judges, sitting here amid tight security around its premises, where some 200 opposition supporters had gathered but were barred from entering, said the election materials should come from 12 of the country's 27 districts.
Malawi's 192 parliamentarians were back on their benches Wednesday after putting an unprecedented stop to proceedings in their bid to seek higher pay in one of Africa's poorest countries.
Riot police were called to quell violence in Malawi's administrative capital Lilongwe on Monday when scores of tobacco growers staged a protest over low auction prices, witnesses said.
Riot police fired teargas to break up a peaceful demonstration of about 30 people against draconian economic reform policies imposed by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Malawi President Bakili Muluzi has set up a committee to review massive hikes in university fees, following violent student protests last month, officials here said Monday.
Students across Malawi rioted Sunday after education authorities cancelled high school examinations following massive leaks of examination papers, police said Monday.
Scores of riot police fired rubber bullets and teargas Monday at hundreds of university students in Malawi's colonial capital Zomba, after police stopped them from presenting a petition on school fees.
A magistrate court in Malawi released former minister Brown Mpinganjira on bail Friday ahead of a trial beginning next week on charges of bribe-taking in a case he denounced as political.
About 40 riot police in a Malawi's biggest city, Blantyre, used teargas Monday to break up an opposition rally in a politically volatile, densely populated township.
A Malawian legislator has been beaten by young supporters of his own party for his ties to a group that opposes a third term for President Bakili Muluzi, the group said Wednesday.
Malawi's upstart opposition party has finally staged a rally in the country's largest shantytown, almost a month after police defied a court order and crushed an earlier demonstration, the party's leader said Monday.
The trial of four men accused of attempting to overthrow the government of Malawi in a violent coup began Tuesday with prosecutors alleging the men planned to take over the presidential palace and the radio station.
Street vendors and riot police fought Friday morning in Malawi's capital after the government destroyed the vendors' stalls and carted off their property during the night.
One man was killed and seven people arrested Sunday when supporters of Malawi's ruling party and the opposition clashed ahead of a rural constituency's by-election.
A mob attacked a van being used by opposition party supporters to announce a political rally, and beat up three of its occupants, police said Sunday.
Striking workers at the Lilongwe Water Board, the only water supplier in Malawi's capital, have turned off the taps to demand a 100 percent pay hike and better working conditions, workers said Friday.
Two people were killed and two others injured in Malawi after police fired tear gas and rubber bullets at demonstrators demanding road improvements, officials said Saturday. Hospital officials said the bullets were live.
Youthful supporters of the ruling party accused opposition demonstrators of insulting the president and assaulted them during a melee Tuesday as Malawi's Parliament began its winter session, leaving at least 20 people injured, 10 of them seriou
Malawi's controversial Muslim leader Sheik Abdul Hamid Bughdad el-Banna, who has sharply criticised President Bakili Muluzi, was attacked early Wednesday in his home, police and hospital officials said.
About 20 heavily armed riot police blocked a peaceful demonstration of about 2,700 schoolteachers in Malawi's largest city Blantyre called to protest a month-long delay in paying salary increases.
A Malawian journalist said he was beaten by several young supporters of Malawi's ruling United Democratic Front for writing critical articles on the government.
Four people were arrested in the Ntcheu district of central Malawi after a border dispute between two villages turned violent and left 39 people homeless, police said Thursday.
Street vendors threw stones, damaging cars, and looted shops on Saturday after their stalls were burnt by city workers as part of a drive to clean up the capital, police said.
Railway workers in Malawi have gone on strike to press for a 100 percent salary increase and the resignation of top managers, a union leader said Tuesday.
Doctors, nurses and other workers at Malawi's main hospital went on strike Friday to demand salary increases and other benefits, leaving patients groaning in pain in hallways and forcing hundreds of others to go home.
A leading Malawian opposition leader pleaded innocent Wednesday to charges of treason as thousands of his supporters chanted their support in the streets outside.
A dozen heavily armed riot police on Wednesday searched the home and office of a prominent university of Malawi researcher in in Zomba, near the commercial capital of Blantyre.
More than 20 people, several of them children, were injured in clashes after a soccer game between two of Malawi's most popular teams in the southern business center of Blantyre.
Two people were shot and seriously wounded Tuesday when police opened fire to disperse students protesting the death of a popular reggae artist in police detention, hospital officials and students said.
Two people were shot and seriously wounded Tuesday when police opened fire to disperse students protesting the death of a popular reggae artist in police detention, hospital officials and students said.
Malawi's tobacco on Thursday sold for 1.80 dollars a kilo, fetching the highest price ever in three years but farmers were still unhappy claiming the prices were still low for the good leaf on offer.
Malawi's tobacco on Thursday sold for 1.80 dollars a kilo, fetching the highest price ever in three years but farmers were still unhappy claiming the prices were still low for the good leaf on offer.
About 3,000 ruling party supporters demonstrated outside a newspaper publisher's offices Monday to protest its printing of articles opposing a thrid term in office for the country's president.
a bigger, historic prayer crusade involving Catholics and Protestant churches would be launched Sunday, the first time that the two churches would come together to oppose a political move.
Tobacco sales at Malawi's three main auction houses were suspended indefinitely Tuesday after farmers protested prices had tumbled too low for them to make a profit.
Scores of armed police have besieged Malawi's university in Zomba, patrolling the campus after a student protest, as well as main roads and selected points in the sleepy town, police and residents said Tuesday.
Heavily-armed riot police on Thursday halted a community debate on a controversial bill that would allow President Bakili Muluzi to stand for a third term in 2004, the debate's organizers said.
Malawi police have banned an inter-denominational prayer crusade scheduled for Saturday in the country's major cities, just over a week after they blocked a public debate here on President Bakili Muluzi's controversial bid for a third term.
Police used tear gas and rubber bullets Monday to disperse members of rival camps of Malawi's main opposition party which clashed outside of the High Court wielding machetes, axes, and stones.
Shortly after the clashes ended, High Court employees staged a rowdy strike, saying they would not return to their jobs until they received a salary increase.
Malawi police said Monday a supporter of President Bakili Muluzi died at the weekend after a clash with knife-wilding members of an opposition pressure group.
Chakuamba, the leader of the main opposition Malawi Congress Party, was arrested Sunday along with his personal secretary, Grace Mhango, and parliamentarians Demster Chikhawo and George Lowe were arrested Monday morning.
A Malawi opposition official has been charged with a traffic offence after he organised a noisy protest against a bill that would allow President Bakili Muluzi to run for a third term, court officials said Wednesday.
Malawi riot police on Friday fired teargas to stop a protest march in Blantyre, the commercial capital, against a third term bid by President Bakili Muluzi, after rival supporters were headed for a clash.
Malawian police fired tear gas and rubber bullets Thursday at protesting street vendors who blocked a highway with boulders, looted shops and pelted cars with stones.
Malawi's powerful lobby group of mainly Christain churches Sunday called for demonstrations against President Bakili Muluzi's bid to stand for a third term in office.
Malawi's powerful lobby group of mainly Christain churches Sunday called for demonstrations against President Bakili Muluzi's bid to stand for a third term in office.
Malawi's powerful lobby group of mainly Christain churches Sunday called for demonstrations against President Bakili Muluzi's bid to stand for a third term in office.
More than 4,000 UDF supporters, some carrying stones, machetes and knives, broke all the windows of the university's library.
A group of Malawi's Young Democrats, the youth wing of President Bakili Muluzi's ruling party, on Tuesday beat up four people outside a magistrate's court here, seriously injuring a woman.
Around 18 supporters of rival political parties were injured at the weekend in central Malawi when police fired teargas to break up clashes between government and opposition supporters, officials told AFP Monday.
Several people were injured by flying crates and furniture and thousands of dollars worth of property was destroyed Monday when violence erupted at a convention to select the presidential candidate for the main opposition party in Malawi.
Police fired tear gas Friday to disperse a violent crowd protesting the secret removal from Malawi of 5 Muslim foreign nationals suspected of being al-Qaeda agents.
Militant youths allied with Malawi's ruling party attacked a newspaper photographer Monday outside the party's national congress.
Two people were wounded when Malawi riot police fired live rounds at a crowd to stop a rally by opposition parties in Blantyre, an opposition spokesman said.
Police have arrested 46 student protesters from the University of Malawi after they clashed with riot police during a demonstration, a police officer said Sunday.
Police in southern Malawi on Monday shot dead two opposition supporters who hurled stones at a police station after a fellow sympathizer died in detention, an opposition party spokesman said Tuesday.
Earlier Saturday, security forces fired tear gas to disperse more than 1,000 demonstrators protesting the delay in announcing results from Thursday's parliamentary and presidential elections.
More than 600 former tea estate workers marched on a Malawi district commissioner's office Thursday, threatening to burn down the government estates if they didn't receive severance pay.
Judges from Malawi's high and supreme courts of appeal have gone on strike to press demands for a fleet of 26 new four-wheeled drive vehicles, a court official said on Friday.
About 4,000 civil servants in Malawi blocked off access to government offices in Lilongwe on Friday at the launch of a strike to press demands for more pension benefits, a union leader said.
A local official from the grain marketing board who declined to be named said riots have broken out in recent weeks when maize deliveries arrive.
A Malawi High Court issued an injunction Monday preventing the questioning of former Malawi President Bakili Muluzi about allegations that 1.4 billion kwacha (US$12 million, [euro]10 million) in donor funds were diverted to his personal account
Police on Tuesday fired on a mob outside the home of a Chinese businessman rumored to have abducted and eaten a number of boys in the southern tea-growing town of Bvumbwe.
Human rights groups in Malawi on Thursday protested a planned visit by Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe, who is accused of widespread abuses in his economically troubled country.
Thousands of street vendors and anti-riot police clashed in street battles in Malawi's commercial capital, Blantyre, Monday as the vendors protested government efforts to evict them.
Up to 10,000 villagers were mobilised by Malawian President Bingu wa Mutharika's party here Tuesday to pressure an opposition-dominated parliament to stop blocking a budget vote.
A coalition of Malawian church leaders and human rights activists held a candlelit vigil and prayers Thursday to beseech God to intercede in the deteriorating human rights and political situation in Zimbabwe.
Malawian rights activists on Tuesday staged a peaceful march in a bid to pressurise the opposition to drop demands to expel 41 lawmakers and instead debate the budget of the impoverished country.
Students throwing rocks beseiged Malawi's parliament Monday, forcing MPs to shelter inside the building in the town of Lilongwe, a parliamentary official who declined to be named said.
Ex-president supporters protest outside of courthouse, protesting charges of embezzlement
Opposition parties hold a rally over term limits, and speakers are later jailed
Villagers protest, claiming the government failed to properly reimburse them for land Madonna used to build a school
Northerners attempt to hold a protest rally accusng the President of discrimination, but are violently stopped by police
Workers march against plans to raise the retirement age.
Demonstrators march to protest an ongoing fuel crisis.
Students riot to protest against a delay in their book allowances.
A top arts group organizes a protest to remember Malawians who died fighting for independence.  The march is disrupted by police, who accuse Norway of funding the arts group.
Students riot after a police officer questions a professor's teachings about the Arab revolutions and their implications for Malawi.
Students riot after a police officer questions a professor's teachings about the Arab revolutions and their implications for Malawi.
Malawians protest because of persistent fuel and foreign exchange shortages, and bad governance.  Protests escalate to nationwide rioting; police and military use lethal force.
Students hold protests outside a school in Zomba over economic and governance issues.  Police use tear gas.
Activists organize a general strike over economic and governance issues.
A riot broke out as police attempted to remove illegal street vendors from the streets of Lilongwe.  Police dispersed the crowd with rubber bullets and tear gas, and arrested 18 people.
Approximately 2000 judicial workers began an indefinite strike to demand that the conditions of a 2006 agreement with parliament that would have given them pay raises in 2006 and 2009.  They were able to obtain a 21% pay raise.
About 2000 women staged a protest against the recent string of attacks against women wearing trousers by a gang of unemployed young men and apparent street vendors.  The gang, which was arrested earlier in the week, would strip and rob women in pants.
Lawyers marched around the judicial buildings in support of the judicial clerks currently on strike, to demand the pay raises they were promised in 2006 and 2009.
The Public Affairs Committee staged a meeting and protest in a church in Limbe, outside Blantyre to circumvent the ban on their gathering.  The protest criticized and called for the resignation of  President Bingu wa Mutharika while discussing potential economic and political reforms.
Hundred of Protesters attacked a police station, beating several officers, after their demonstration was broken up by police with tear gas.
Hundreds of Malawians gathered at Kamuzu International Airport to see the transportation of the body of the former President Bingu wa Mutharika.  He died in South Africa of a heart attack on April 5.
Around 3000 people, mostly Mutharika supporters, attended the funeral of controversial President Bingu was Mutharika, who died of a heart attack on April 5.
Around 1000 workers at the Australian owned Paladin Energy mine (Malawi's largest) began a strike to demand a 66% pay raise after Malawi devalued its currency by a third.
Prisoners of the Zomba Central Prison outside Blantyre rioted, disrupting the release of 34 prisoners who had been pardoned by President Banda.  Rioters claimed there was a rapist and a murderer among the released prisoners.
Public workers, including power and water utility workers and university lecturers have been beginning strikes to demand pay raises in reponse to the devaluing of Malawian currency.  Power and water utility workers both obtained raises.
University of Malawi students rioted in support of lecturers demanding a 113% pay raise.  One police officer was injured when hit with a thrown stone, and police used tear gas to disperse the crowd.
Civil Servants went on strike demanding greater wages
Children protesting the closure of schools in response to Malawi Civil Servants strike for higher wages
at rally by President Banda in a village (a stronghold of her rival) activists attacked rally goers with stones, police tried to break up crowd with tear gas; government vehicles were attacked and some occupants injured; 1 policeman axed to death and 1 activist shot dead
after polling stations opened 10 hours late, anger and speculations about the fairness of the vote led to violence, including the burning of polling stations and snatching of ballot papers in several areas of Blantyre as well as a mini-protest by 50 youths chanting anti-government slogans  in the city center; army deployed in response, in one location police fired tear gas
more than a hundred protesters tried to march to local government offices to demand recount of votes, but when stopped by police, began throwing stones; police fired tear gas and rubber bullets, teenager killed by teargas canister
more than 1,000 teachers went on strike after not receiving salaries (reported to be one of a series of strikes); education minister said at least 6,600 teachers had not been paid since May
about 500 schoolchildren between ages 6 and 12 broke classroom windows and damaged at least 40 cars and marched towards president's home to protest teachers' strike to demand that the government pay their teachers so they can resume teaching; police fired tear gas (no injuries reported by police)
Around 2,000 people marched in front of the South African High Commission in Lilongwe to protest xenophobic attacks against immigrants in South Africa, which have forced hundreds of Malawians to flee back to Malawi.
A 12 week episode of riots, protests, and a strike by 25,000 railway workers over wage increases, pitting black workers against white management.
Protesters demonstrate against an English cricket team that is defying a ban on sports ties with South Africa.  Police attack the crowd with dogs and tear gas.
Hundreds of black activists demonstrate against the English cricket team, which is violating a ban on international sports contracts with South Africa.  The protest turns into a riot with demonstrators smashing car and shop windows.
Police fire tear gas at a Roman Catholic church in Bloemfontein to break up 1000 person protest demonstrating against the English cricket team.  Police fire tear gas at 1000 black railway workers following a union meeting in Johannesburg.
Police fire tear gas at a Roman Catholic church in Bloemfontein to break up 1000 person protest demonstrating against the English cricket team.  Police fire tear gas at 1000 black railway workers following a union meeting in Johannesburg.
Thousands of blacks fill the streets of several cities to celebrate announcement of the ANC's legalization and Nelson Mandela's release from prison.
Right wing assailants shoot out windows at the British embassy in retaliation fro the UK's support of the anti-apartheid reforms.
Police repress a black protest.  Causes are unknown.
Protests over the presence of the English cricket team, which is playing in South Africa even despite sanctions against it.  Police use tear gas.
Hundreds of black protesters mark the legalization of the ANC.  Protest turns violent and police hit them with clubs and use tear gas.
Throughout the country, tens of thousands march and dance in the streets to celebrate Nelson Mandela's release from prison.
Black factional violence between the ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party in Natal province.  Nationwide, Indians come under attack by blacks, especially in the area around Durban.
15,000 white Conservative Party supporters protest government decision to free Mandela and legalize the ANC.
Widespread boycott of offices, schools, and businesses leads to clashes in which 25 people are killed.  Activists demand that the chief minister of the region resign.
Supporters of the white anti-apartheid Democratic Party and the black United Democratic Front hold a joint protest to express racial solidarity.
Police kill two protesters that attack a black community center in Kroonstad.  Two people killed in Venda when police disperse a rally.  Police arrest people demonstrating outside of Parliament in Cape Town.
Black factional violence in Natal.
Several days of protest in favor of hunger-striking prisoners.  Police make many arrests.
The army of the Ciskei autonomous region overthrows the authoritarian rule of Lennox Sebe.  Oupa Gqozo takes control.  The national government supports the coup.  Widespread rioting and looting erupts in which 27 die.
Wave of mass strikes and protests against the government of the semi-autonomous Venda region.  The protesters demand that Venda be reincorporated into South Africa and that investigations be opened into allegations of ritual murder.
50,000 protesters march to demand the reintegration of the nominally independent Bophuthatswana region into South Africa.  Police fire on the crowd after it sets fire to public buildings and vehicles.
Rival black taxi groups battle for control over routes.
Black teachers stage a demonstration.  Armed whites arrive with whips and other weapons to disrupt the march.  Police arrest many of them.
Black factional violence in Natal.
3 black men are stoned and burned to death.  Causes unknown.
Protest of unknown size over food prices in which 50 are arrested.
Series of attacks and clashes between police and rioters in Cape and Orange Free States.  Series of killings in townships around Johannesburg and the Orange Free State as Black factions battle.  Over 60 incidents are recorded.
700 ANC supporters gather to commemorate the deaths in the recent violence in Kathlelong.
Blacks stage protests and strikes across the country against the white government.  Black police officers strike for higher pay in white police forces.  Riots occur as black factions clash in various locations across the country.
ANC demonstration.  Police open fire, killing 10.
Black factions battle, ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party fight.
The Venda Defense Force overthrows the Venda government.
Black demonstrators throw fire bombs and stones at police, who return fire.
Black factions wage war on each other.  Several incidents of violence occur.  Police open fire in several incidents, adding to the death toll.
Black factions clash.
Racial clash at a gold mine.
Tens of thousands of white pro-apartheid supporters demonstrate against the government and its reforms.
Black factions wage war.
Black factions wage war.
250 white supremacists march to protest the detention without charge of two whites.
Black supporters of ANC stage dozens of rallies across the country to commemorate the 1976 Soweto uprising.  20,000 pack into a Soweto stadium.  Police use tear gas in Johannesburg and in Natal.
8 are killed in nationwide violence between black factions, especially in Natal.
A wave of bombing attacks occurs targeting government, blacks, and Jewish temples.
Up to 3 million blacks take part in a strike called by the ANC to protest black factional fighting.  Scattered violence occurs around the country, leading to 2 deaths from police violence.
Right wing extremists set off a bomb near a black taxi stand.
Black factions wage war in townships east of Johannesburg.  Repeated massacres of Xhosas and Zulus.   Police use tear gas.
Black factions wage war in townships east of Johannesburg.  Repeated massacres of Xhosas and Zulus.   Police use tear gas.
Black factions wage war in townships east of Johannesburg.  Repeated massacres of Xhosas and Zulus.   Police use tear gas.
Black factions wage war in townships east of Johannesburg.  Repeated massacres of Xhosas and Zulus.   Police use tear gas.
Women's League protests against alleged government and police bias in recent ethnic violence.
protesters demand that the Broadcasting Corp. disband a restructuring task force, allow unionization, and promote racially balanced hiring.
University students protest alleged police violence in recent ethnic violence.
University students protest alleged police violence in recent ethnic violence.
Black factions kill 3 in townships around Johannesburg.
Black factions kill 3 in townships around Johannesburg.
Attacks on trains in the Johannesburg area kill more than two dozen people
3000 people march to protest new police measures announced by the central government in order to curb violence in the black townships.
Squatters and residents battle over control of houses in the Crossroads community of Cape Town.
Black factions clash in Evaton.
A gang of 10 to 20 black men steal knives from a weapons store and attack whites on the beach.
Armed men attack a worker's compound.  Causes unknown.
Zulu gangs attack Xhosas in their compound at a coal mine.
Unrest in which 3 are killed.  Presumably this is apart of the ongoing clash between ANC and Inkatha in Natal.
Clash between mine workers.
5 die in separate incidents throughout Natal.
Clashes between Xhosas and Zulus, some of which involves criminal gangs.
18 die in nationwide incidents of which nothing is known.  This violence includes one incident in Johannesburg when police fire on a protest march of black activists.
Rival factions clash.
Inter-black violence in which several die.
Inter-black violence in which several die.
The ANC holds rallies and protests in 3 major cities to put pressure on the government over reform and the ongoing violence in the black townships.
The ANC holds rallies and protests in 3 major cities to put pressure on the government over reform and the ongoing violence in the black townships.
The ANC holds rallies and protests in 3 major cities to put pressure on the government over reform and the ongoing violence in the black townships.
Black faction clash.
3000 neo-Nazi supporters rally against the ANC and declare that there will be war if blacks take over the government.
40,000 people rally at a soccer stadium at the end of an ANC legal conference in Soweto.  3000 neo-Nazi supporters rally against the ANC in Bethal.
Black factions battle.
Black factions battle.
Black factions battle.
Unknown gunmen fire into a crowd of ANC mourners in Sebokeng township.  39 die.
600 people rally in a Muslim section of Cape Town to protest the US military presence in the Persian Gulf.  Protests continue outside the US consulate for several days.
Fans begin brawling at a soccer match, triggering a panic among spectators.  Many are trampled to death.
Charles Sebe, brother of the ousted president of Ciskei, attempts a military coup.  He is shot dead by government forces.
10,000 protesters organized by ANC march in front of parliament to demand further reforms.
Factional violence leads to 9 deaths in various townships.
Factional violence leads to 9 deaths in various townships.
Factional violence leads to 9 deaths in various townships.
Violence in a township near Johannesburg.
Black factions clash.  A bus is ambushed and 17 people die.  ANC is Xhosa, Inkatha Freedom Party is Zulu.
Scattered political violence between ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party results in 6 deaths.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black township violence in Khayelitsha and Tembisa.
Black township clashes in Alexandra, Tembisa,  Westonaria.
Police and ANC supporters battle in Daveyton.
Faction fighting throughout Natal province.
Faction fighting throughout Natal province.
Factions battle.
Factions battle.
Black factions clash.
Smugglers crossing the border open fire on police.  4 killed.
Black factions clash.  Police use tear gas to keep combatants apart.
Nationwide hunger strike by 230 political prisoners.
Bombs explode in Johannesburg.
Black faction clash.
Black faction clash.
1000 ANC activists march on Parliament to protest apartheid.
Violence between black factions.
Thousands of ANC supporters protest for jobs, peace, and freedom.
Thousands of ANC supporters protest for jobs, peace, and freedom.
Thousands of ANC supporters protest for jobs, peace, and freedom.
Thousands of ANC supporters protest for jobs, peace, and freedom.
65 prisoners begin hunger strike to demand Bophuthatswana  be re-incorporated with South Africa.
6 political prisoners stage hunger strike.
Factional clash.
Gunmen kill 6 people in a random attack on a commuter train.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
At least 30 people die nationwide in unrest between black factions.
Platinum miners strike over disciplinary action taken against a colleague.  The workers riot, setting fires.  Security officials use tear gas.
Right wing extremists arrested on charges of murder stage a hunger strike against their detainment.
20,000 auto workers strike for increased pay and job security.
Black factional clash.
5000 teachers march to protest educational conditions.
Hundreds of armed neo-Nazis and sympathizers try to gate crash a hall where the President is addressing followers.  They protest his reform policies toward blacks and clash with security forces.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Workers stage a slow down to demand higher wages.  Violence erupts between groups of miners, leading to 8 deaths.
Unknown gunmen attack a train, killing 1 police officer in Johannesburg.   2 die in Kimberly when a mob attacks police, rioting and burning.
Workers strike over wage issues and are then dismissed.  This is a series of strikes in multiple locations
School children protest conditions in township schools.  Police shoot one to death.
Black factions flash.
Black factions flash.
Black factions flash.
Gunmen ambush members of the Inkatha Freedom Party  marching through the Tokoza township, triggering revenge attacks in Soweto.  Violence rages for several days in the Johannesburg area townships.
Gunmen ambush members of the Inkatha Freedom Party  marching through the Tokoza township, triggering revenge attacks in Soweto.  Violence rages for several days in the Johannesburg area townships.
ANC stages protest to demand the government house 500 squatters made homeless by the recent township violence.
Unknown gunmen kill ANC and PAC activists across the country.
Violence at a mine ascribed to ethnicity.
Black factions clash.
Thousands protest across the country against a new Value Added Tax.
Thousands protest across the country against a new Value Added Tax.
Thousands protest across the country against a new Value Added Tax.
Thousands protest across the country against a new Value Added Tax.
Gunmen assassinate an ANC official.
Black factions clash after gunmen kill 18 at the funeral for Sam Ntulu.
Black factions clash after gunmen kill 18 at the funeral for Sam Ntulu.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters clash.
Black factions clash.  Taxi cab drivers clash in Cape Town over routes.
Black factions clash.  Taxi cab drivers clash in Cape Town over routes.
Black factions clash.  Taxi cab drivers clash in Cape Town over routes.
3500 doctors protest against the Value Added Tax.
Ethnic violence at a gold mine leads to 70 deaths.  3500 workers are sent home by the Anglo-American Gold company.
7 killed in black factional violence.
3.5 to 4 million black workers strike against the Value Added Tax.  Total strike related deaths is 23.
35,000 black miners strike to protest the recent dismissal of 220 employees that participated in a sit-in.
About 100 students protest in support of in favor of an emblem for the Olympic team.
Black factional violence.
83 members of COSATU stage a hunger strike after being arrested during the general strike of Nov. 4-5.
A mob of 10 ANC supporters kills a PAC supporter.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factional violence, primarily between Zulus.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters battle at a stadium.
Gunmen attack a commuter train.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters clash.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters clash.
Police allegedly kill a black youth.
White conservative group claims two bombings.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters clash.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters clash.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters clash.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters clash.
About 20 people from right wing groups protest against the government and CODESA.
Black factions clash in townships, ANC supporters clash with local tribesmen in Ciskei.
Black factions clash in townships, ANC supporters clash with local tribesmen in Ciskei.
Strike at a mine.  No other information is known.
Radical anti-apartheid group ambushes police in black township.
10,000 workers strike to show solidarity with 1800 workers dismissed after they stages a sit-in over jobs.
Radical anti-apartheid group tosses a bomb into the offices of a music promoter, in protest over Paul Simon's forthcoming tour of South Africa.
130 AZAYO members picket a Paul Simon concert
100 AZAYO members picket a Paul Simon concert
Black factional fighting.
Black factional fighting.
Black factional fighting.
Black factional fighting.
Black factional fighting.
Black factional fighting.
Over the course of one month, there are 45 attacks on trains, resulting in 71 deaths.
Violence in black townships across the country.
Series of train attacks claims 36 lives.
Right wing extremists protest against the president, hitting over the head with a bottle in Pretoria.  A bomb goes off at the offices of the National Party in Nylstroom.
Right wing extremists protest against the president, hitting over the head with a bottle in Pretoria.  A bomb goes off at the offices of the National Party in Nylstroom.
Strike over firings.  Hostages are briefly taken.
Black factional fighting.
Xhosa militants massacre 22 Inkatha Freedom Party supporters in Crossroads township (Cape Town).
Black factional fighting.
Black factional fighting.
Black factional fighting in the townships.  (Tembisa, Nkmatsheni, Soweto)
Black factional violence.
Gunmen attack a bus.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.  15 gunmen attack a bus.
Black factions clash.  15 gunmen attack a bus.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Auto workers strike against Toyota due to the racism of supervisors.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash
Black factions clash
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Strike by hospital workers demanding a living wage.  Violence erupts between strikers and non-strikers.
A night of violence in the townships leaves 23 dead.
ANC stages a protest to commemorate the Soweto Uprising of 1976.  9 are shot dead in clashes between ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party.
Most of Soweto's 3 million people observe a stay-away, while the ANC stages protests of various sizes to commemorate the Soweto Uprising of 1976.
Boipatong Massacre. 300 Zulu hostel dwellers (Inkatha Freedom Party supporters) attack Xhosa (ANC) squatters.
Protest in the aftermath of the Baipotong Massacre.  Police open fire, killing 3.
Black factions clash.
Massive series of strikes all around the country, mostly called by the ANC to pressure the government, to protest economic conditions, and to protest the Boipatong Massacre.  Many strikers commence protest marches.
Black factional violence.
Black factional violence.
15,000 unionists protest to demand a living wage and calling for the toppling of the government.  Police open fire, 9 die.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
The ANC launches a general strike to call for the toppling of the government.  Some 4 million blacks stop work.  In several incidents, strikers hurl rocks and riot.  3 Blacks are shot to death by police in Soweto.
100,000 black march with Mandela to demand the toppling of the government.
ANC stages a 6000 strong protest march to a police station.
ANC gunmen kill 20 around Natal.  Ongoing violence blamed on ideological and ethnic reasons.
Black factions clash.
ANC stages a protest march in Bisho (capital of Ciskei), calling for the toppling of that homeland's government.  Security forces open fire on the march, killing 23.
400 white supporters of the liberal Democratic Party march to demand negotiations to end the ongoing political violence.
10,000 Zulu members of Inkatha Freedom Party march through Johannesburg, protesting the government and the ANC.
Inkatha Freedom Party supporters attack a village of the ANC, killing 8.  Police who go to the village are shot at.  Police return fire, killing one.
A mob attacks a house, killing 3.
Black factions clash nationwide.
Gunmen belonging to the military wing of the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC) attack whites, killing 4.
A bomb explodes at a restaurant frequented by conservative Whites in Queenstown.  APLA is the primary suspect.
APLA gunmen kill a 15 year old girl in an attack on a farm in the Orange Free State.
Black factional violence throughout Natal.
Black factional violence kills 14 nationwide.
Bomb explodes at a store owned by a white ANC member.
Two white men abduct and kill a black man.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
PAC supporters protest and then hurl rocks and throw up roadblocks to protest South Africa's harassing of people crossing the border from the independent Transkei region into South Africa proper.
6 black high schoolers die in an ambush that sets off a battle between ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters, leaving 20 more dead.
Black gunmen kill 4 whites driving in Johannesburg.  Police suspect Azanian People's Liberation Army.
Muslims demonstrate in Beirut, Tehran, Dhaka, Istanbul and at the Israeli embassy in Cape Town on Jerusalem Day.
Four blacks (including 2 ANC members) are arrested after shooting dead 3 whites in Johannesburg.
Gunmen kill a white student in an apparent racial attack.
In an apparent racial attack, a white man dies when gunmen fire on his car.
Students riot to protest school related fees.
10 ANC supporters killed in an ambush.
A white militant associated with the Afrikaner Resistance Movement assassinates the leader of the South African Communist Party.
About 1500 blacks riot, throwing stones and shooting at police in protest over Chris Hani's killing.
Black gunmen in two cars shoot dead 17 blacks in Sebokeng.  Violence erupts in several other places, including a police battle with black mourners.
Black gunmen in two cars shoot dead 17 blacks in Sebokeng.  Violence erupts in several other places, including a police battle with black mourners.
Black gunmen in two cars shoot dead 17 blacks in Sebokeng.  Violence erupts in several other places, including a police battle with black mourners.
Black gunmen in two cars shoot dead 17 blacks in Sebokeng.  Violence erupts in several other places, including a police battle with black mourners.
A white man kills 2 blacks at an ANC protest march.  Further details unknown.
2 white men burnt to death in Lwandle.
Millions of blacks boycott work to honor Chris Hani, a black leader killed on 4/10.
A car bomb explodes, injuring nine whites.  The event is believed to be racial in nature.
Black gunmen spray a country club with bullets.  No one is injured.
Black gunmen spray a country club with bullets.  No one is injured.
Students protest and boycott classes throughout the month over school related fees.  The crisis ends on 5/20 when the government agrees to scrap the fee.
Three masked black gunmen attack a hotel bar, killing 5 whites.
A white motorist is shot dead in Transkei in an apparent racial attack.
Tens of thousands of Inkatha Freedom Party supporters march to police headquarters to protest the 280 Inkatha Freedom Party office bearers killed in political violence since 1985.
An ANC protest marches past an Inkatha Freedom Party hostel in Thokaza, triggering a clash in which 67 die.  100 are killed in nationwide violence between the two factions.
An ANC protest marches past an Inkatha Freedom Party hostel in Thokaza, triggering a clash in which 67 die.  100 are killed in nationwide violence between the two factions.
An ANC protest marches past an Inkatha Freedom Party hostel in Thokaza, triggering a clash in which 67 die.  100 are killed in nationwide violence between the two factions.
A bomb explodes in the parking lot of a local court.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party clash.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party clash.
Inkatha Freedom Party supporters conduct a funeral processes ion through an ANC held street.  When gunfire erupts, Inkatha Freedom Party supporters drag an ANC supporter from a house and spear and shoot him to death.
Millions of blacks stay home to commemorate the Soweto Massacre of June 1976.  ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party engage in protest marches, denouncing the government and each other.  1 man dies in the marches.
Blacks try to march in order to commemorate Soweto Day, but are blocked by police, who open fire and kill one.  The local ANC calls for a black boycott of white businesses.
Several incidents of gunmen targeting ANC or Inkatha Freedom Party.  Raids are staged against one or the other.  Ethnic Zulu violence is specifically mentioned.
Several incidents of gunmen targeting ANC or Inkatha Freedom Party.  Raids are staged against one or the other.  Ethnic Zulu violence is specifically mentioned.
Several incidents of gunmen targeting ANC or Inkatha Freedom Party.  Raids are staged against one or the other.  Ethnic Zulu violence is specifically mentioned.
2000 right wing militants led by the Afrikaner Resistance Movement and the Afrikaner Volksfront raid the World Trade Center, site of South Africa's democracy talks.  300 of them invade the negotiating chamber and spray paint slogans.
Random shootings in Sebokeng township.  Motive unknown.
The PAC stages small protest outside the democracy talks, assailing the right wing raid on the talks the week prior and to present a memorandum to the negotiators.
Black factions clash.
ANC led stay-away of unknown size.  Organized to protest the right wing raid on the democracy talks.
Tribal clans clash for unknown reasons.
ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party clash nationwide.  91 of the dead are in Tokoza and Katlehong.  47 killed in Natal province, 15 killed in and around Cape Town.
Black workers strike against Sun City, an amusement/entertainment park with casinos and restaurants.  The workers strike to protest being hired on temporary contracts only.
Gunmen attack an ANC section of the Ezakheni township, killing 10.
Gunmen kill 9 people in a random attack.
APLA attacks police stations and bombs cars, wounding several.
A gang of 11 men stopped a minibus taxi, rounds up the ANC and PAC members and executes 6 of them.  The 6 dead are Zulus of the Inkatha Freedom Party .
Workers strike over management practice of giving unpaid leave to cut costs.
Black factions clash, resulting in 47 deaths.
Black factions clash, resulting in 47 deaths.
Black gunmen attack a white church, killing 11.
About 200 armed men raid Soweto, setting houses on fire in the Power Park squatter camp.
An ANC gang attacks township residents in Tembisa.  Residents fight back and kill one gang member and the rest hide in an Inkatha Freedom Party hostel.  A mob of 200 people then erupt from the hostel and rampage in the township.
An ANC gang attacks township residents in Tembisa.  Residents fight back and kill one gang member and the rest hide in an Inkatha Freedom Party hostel.  A mob of 200 people then erupt from the hostel and rampage in the township.
An ANC gang attacks township residents in Tembisa.  Residents fight back and kill one gang member and the rest hide in an Inkatha Freedom Party hostel.  A mob of 200 people then erupt from the hostel and rampage in the township.
An ANC gang attacks township residents in Tembisa.  Residents fight back and kill one gang member and the rest hide in an Inkatha Freedom Party hostel.  A mob of 200 people then erupt from the hostel and rampage in the township.
An ANC gang attacks township residents in Tembisa.  Residents fight back and kill one gang member and the rest hide in an Inkatha Freedom Party hostel.  A mob of 200 people then erupt from the hostel and rampage in the township.
Rival demonstrations by the AWB (Afrikaner Resistance Movement) and the ANC pass each other in the street.  They denounce ongoing violence, and make claims about democratization.
40,000 people stage a peace rally organized by Christian churches.
70,000 teachers strike, demanding a raise.  Students stage sit-ins and marches in support of them.
Factional violence across the country.
Factional violence across the country.
Factional violence across the country.
Factional violence across the country.
APLA attacks an oil depot and engages in a firefight with police.
Several incidents of factional fights.
Several incidents of factional fights.
A black mob kills an American student in Guguletu township.  The suspects are later tied to the PAC.
Clash between residents of a squatter camp and soldiers.  Details unknown.
Gunmen attack a bus.  No one is killed.  The attack appears to be racial in character.
Black gunmen kill a white woman on a roadside in the Transkei region.
Thousands take the streets in Johannesburg, Tokoza, Pretoria, and Cape Town to protest for peace.  Millions across the nation observe five minutes silence, organized by the ANC.
Renewed political violence in the townships and Natal.  ANC staged protests in Vosloroos.  Police clash with ANC and one dies.
Renewed political violence in the townships and Natal.  ANC staged protests in Vosloroos.  Police clash with ANC and one dies.
Renewed political violence in the townships and Natal.  ANC staged protests in Vosloroos.  Police clash with ANC and one dies.
Renewed political violence in the townships and Natal.  ANC staged protests in Vosloroos.  Police clash with ANC and one dies.
Hundreds of people march through a township to call for peace after the murder of an American scholar/peace worker.
A white farmer is killed in a racial attack in Mandela Park.  Black gunmen torch a hotel in Ladybrand.
A white farmer is killed in a racial attack in Mandela Park.  Black gunmen torch a hotel in Ladybrand.
APLA attacks a hotel, wounding several and causing extensive damage.
Gunmen kill 25 black commuters, including 21 waiting in line for taxis.
Several incidents in East Rand and Natal, claiming 89 deaths.
Several incidents in East Rand and Natal, claiming 89 deaths.
Taxi drivers protest against fuel prices.  Police fire shotguns to disperse the crowd.  Several days of riots follow.
Gunmen kill commuters in East Rand and Natal.
Gunmen kill commuters in East Rand and Natal.
Black factional violence.
Black factional violence.
Black factional violence.
Black factional violence.
Black factional violence.
24 taxi passengers are shot to death in two attacks south of Johannesburg.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
Gunmen attack taxis.
Gunmen attack taxis.
The army raids a APLA hideout, killing 5.
Neo-Nazis protest around the country about the end of Apartheid.
200 whites protest a government raid in Transkei that killed 5 black militants.
Police stage a wildcat strike to protest the attitude of the station chief.
Youths riot over the army raid of 10/8, clash with police.
Black factional violence.
Black factional violence.
Black factional violence.
Black factional violence.
Thousands of union workers protest against provisions in the newly proposed constitution.
About 150 people protest against a showing of Jesus Christ Superstar.
Inkatha Freedom Party gunmen attack an ANC homestead in Ixopo, killing 10.  Police then raid an Inkatha Freedom Party stronghold in Nquthu, bringing deaths to 25.  More deaths are reported in Natal and East Rand.
Political violence kills 32 in Natal over the course of several days.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
3000 protesters organized by the ANC march on the democracy negotiations at the World Trade Center to demand that police riot squads be removed from East Rand townships.
Armed members of Inkatha Freedom Party besiege a stadium where Nelson Mandela of ANC is speaking to a rally.  Mandela calls for the end of black homelands and vows to abolish the KwaZulu regional police.
Inkatha Freedom Party and ANC battle.
Inkatha Freedom Party and ANC battle.
Gunmen assassinate an ANC official.
Several incidents in which gunmen attack police stations.
Several incidents in which gunmen attack police stations.
A bomb explodes at a Durban hotel, killing 1.  Nine hours later, a bomb explodes at Port Edward, a small town 100 miles south, but no one is hurt.  The next day, a bomb explodes in Kruegersdorp.
Black factions clash.  9 die.
A right wing organization seizes control of a historic fort outside of Pretoria in protest over the seating of a new Transitional Executive Council.
Violence throughout the Johannesburg area townships leads to many deaths.  More deaths occur in Natal towns.  In Bekkersdal, a 100 strong mob armed with spears goes on a rampage and kills 4.
Violence throughout the Johannesburg area townships leads to many deaths.  More deaths occur in Natal towns.  In Bekkersdal, a 100 strong mob armed with spears goes on a rampage and kills 4.
Violence throughout the Johannesburg area townships leads to many deaths.  More deaths occur in Natal towns.  In Bekkersdal, a 100 strong mob armed with spears goes on a rampage and kills 4.
Violence throughout the Johannesburg area townships leads to many deaths.  More deaths occur in Natal towns.  In Bekkersdal, a 100 strong mob armed with spears goes on a rampage and kills 4.
Violence throughout the Johannesburg area townships leads to many deaths.  More deaths occur in Natal towns.  In Bekkersdal, a 100 strong mob armed with spears goes on a rampage and kills 4.
Racially motivated attacks kill five black citizens.
Unknown gunmen ambush and kill 2 policemen in two incidents.
White militants force two cars off the road and kill two blacks.
A right wing group sets off a bomb at a power pylon, demanding a separate homeland for whites.
White militants shoot a black family car.  No one is killed.
Factional violence.
Factional violence.
Factional violence.
Factional violence.
Factional violence.
Factional violence.
20 ANC protesters heckle the president during his first campaign speech.
Black gunmen open fire on a pub, killing four whites.
11 killed in Tokoza and Katlehong, 3 killed in Chatsworth, 1 killed in Durban during a riot.  1 gunned down in Cape Town.
11 killed in Tokoza and Katlehong, 3 killed in Chatsworth, 1 killed in Durban during a riot.  1 gunned down in Cape Town.
11 killed in Tokoza and Katlehong, 3 killed in Chatsworth, 1 killed in Durban during a riot.  1 gunned down in Cape Town.
APLA attacks a pub on New Year's Day.
At least 20 bombs explode over the course of several weeks in many rural towns.  Police suspect right wing whites.
Workers strike against a bottling company to demand a wage increase.  The workers protest in Johannesburg, and police fire rubber bullets to disperse them.
Gunmen open fire, killing an AP reporter and 3 others.
35,000 Zulus march to the Union Buildings where the Zulu monarch is meeting the president.  This occurs in the context of an election campaign.
Ongoing political violence throughout the country.  4 die in Ndedwe, 9 die in Ngonyameni when gunmen on a minibus go on a killing spree.
Ongoing political violence throughout the country.  4 die in Ndedwe, 9 die in Ngonyameni when gunmen on a minibus go on a killing spree.
Ongoing political violence throughout the country.  4 die in Ndedwe, 9 die in Ngonyameni when gunmen on a minibus go on a killing spree.
Thousands of right wing whites gather in the capital to authorize their leaders to use limited violence to win an independent white state.
APLA launches grenades into a swimming pool and then opens fire.
The instructors for the National Peacekeeping Force strike.
The black homeland of Bophuthatswana refuses re-incorporation into South Africa.  In response, civil servants strike.  In March, the ANC joins in support.  There are periodic clashes and riots.
The black homeland of Bophuthatswana refuses re-incorporation into South Africa.  In response, civil servants strike.  In March, the ANC joins in support.  There are periodic clashes and riots.
Gunmen carrying assault rifles massacre civilians.  Linked to ongoing Inkatha Freedom Party-ANC clash.
Fights break out between Inkatha Freedom Party and ANC supporters as Zulus arrive in Durban to hear their king give a speech.
20,000 Zulus gather as the Zulu king meets with the president.  The king demands new territory and independence.
APLA opens fire at a disco and sets multiple bombs throughout Cape Province.
An ANC leader is gunned down.
15 ANC supporters involved in a voter education program are shot and stabbed to death.
A mob of Azanian People's Liberation Army supporters beat and rob five whites.
A bomb explodes at a black school.  White right wingers are suspected.
Several incidents of racial violence, including the murder of one white.
6 Inkatha Freedom Party supporters killed on their way to a rally.
A bomb explodes in a multi-racial apartment block.  Motive unknown.
Supporters of the ANC and the National Party (the ruling party since 1948) trade gunfire after an NP supporter kills an ANC supporter at an NP rally.
ANC supporters throw stones at the President during a campaign speech, hitting him with a flying projectile.
ANC supporters burn an Inkatha Freedom Party workers hostel.
3500 members of the peacekeeping force strike over pay.
White militants bomb the ANC offices.
Inkatha Freedom Party gunmen kill 11 ANC supporters
ANC and PAC supporters demonstrate after a rally by the President.  They begin throwing rocks at the police, who break up the disturbance with rubber bullets.
Hundreds of residents of the black homeland protest to demand that the central government intervene against the regional government.
The weeks of strikes in the Bophuthatswana homeland culminate in violence.  Hundreds of Afrikaner white militiamen pour into the homeland to prop up the rule of the black president.  Gunfights follow between the whites and the regional police.
Black gunmen enter a Ba'hai church and kill 3 Iranian worshippers.
Inkatha Freedom Party supporters occupy a stadium where the ANC is due to give a rally.  Clashes erupt.  5 die.
Black factions clash.  Death toll from a week of violence reaches 60.
About 3000 prison inmates begin work stoppages and marches across South Africa to protest against exclusion from upcoming election.  In some prisons, the warders use tear gas, rubber bullets, and dogs.
200 National Party supporters throw stones and bottles at ANC supporters during a rally by Nelson Mandela.
Ongoing violence between ANC and IFP.
A tense stand-off/protest ensues between ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters ahead of an ANC rally.  The situation nearly turns into a riot, but police keep them apart with tear gas.
Police and civil servants strike in the Ciskei region because they fear losing their pay and benefits once Apartheid ends and the region is dissolved.  They take fellow officers and wives hostage.  The strike leads to rioting and looting.
Tens of thousands of ANC supporters march to demand free electioneering and to show ANC support in the traditional Zulu stronghold.
Factional clashes leave 70 dead over a several day period.
Thousands of Zulus organized by the IFP march to protest the upcoming election.  ANC guards fire on them, killing many.  ANC and Zulus battle across the city.  Fighting continues for several days.
Gunmen kill 5 ANC supporters.
Ongoing black violence in Natal, including an incident at a church in Estcourt, where gunmen kill 5 worshippers.
21 die in politically related violence.
Soldiers open fire on IFP supporters, killing 1.
Unidentified gunmen attack election workers distributing pamphlets.
IFP and ANC supporters clash over three week period, leaving 7 dead at the Western Areas gold mine.
Gunmen kill 2 ANC election workers.  A mob of IFP supporters then besieges a police station where ANC canvassers have fled for safety.
A bombing spree perpetrated by whites.  On 4/24, a car bomb kills 9 people in Johannesburg near the ANC headquarters.  On 4/25, a bomb destroys a taxi stand used by black commuters in Pretoria.  Another bomb explodes the same day in Gerimston.
A bombing spree perpetrated by whites.  On 4/24, a car bomb kills 9 people in Johannesburg near the ANC headquarters.  On 4/25, a bomb destroys a taxi stand used by black commuters in Pretoria.  Another bomb explodes the same day in Gerimston.
A bombing spree perpetrated by whites.  On 4/24, a car bomb kills 9 people in Johannesburg near the ANC headquarters.  On 4/25, a bomb destroys a taxi stand used by black commuters in Pretoria.  Another bomb explodes the same day in Gerimston.
Gunmen open fire, killing 5 people.
12 deaths nationwide in political violence.  Further details unknown.
Hundreds of children march to celebrate peace.
Protests and riots occur in South Africa's prisoners.  The prisoners demand to be freed.  One inmate is shot and killed trying to escape at Modderbee prison, where another is also killed in rioting as the prisoners begin fighting each other.
Six armed men open fire on a taxi, killing 3.
Gunmen open fire on civilians, killing 11.
An escalating series of strikes over wages and racism in the workplace.  Strikes start with grocery workers and then spread into the justice, metal, railway, and auto sectors.  Over 100,000 workers are involved.  The strikers turn violent.
Gunmen kill a family of 9.
More than 1000 workers march to protest police action against pickets and in support of ongoing strikes.
400 demonstrators protest outside the headquarters of South African television over the broadcast of a program that shows the Inkatha party in a bad light.
5 people killed in separate incidents in KwaZulu-Natal after the broadcast of a controversial television program showing the IFP in a bad light.
Millions of South Africans pour into the streets to celebrate National Peace Day.
Protest in a black township near Johannesburg over a cut-off of electricity and water supplies.
Protests escalate to riots.  Clashes with police occur.  Residents demand a flat rate for services and rent, that electricity arrears be written off, and the Noorgesig be merged with Soweto.
IFP protesters surround the palace of the Zulu king to protest the presence of Nelson Mandela at a meeting.  They throw stones at the President.
Security guards strike.
Striking security guards stage a protest which escalates to riots.  Shots are traded with the police.  Striking bus drivers blockade streets.
7 civilians killed by unknown gunmen.
Members of the ANC's former armed wing demonstrate outside ANC headquarters to demand higher pay and better integration into the armed forces.
7000 troops from former paramilitary organizations go AWOL to protest for better pay and better integration with the armed forces.
12 killed in black factional fighting.
7000 troops from former paramilitary organizations go AWOL to protest for better pay and better integration with the armed forces.
Gunmen kill the former head of the Dutch Reformed Church, a noted anti-apartheid activist.
Gunmen kill 35 in two separate incidents.
A riot breaks out of dozens of squatter families are evicted from a building, clash with police.
Police union stages a go-slow strike, which allows 54 prisoners around the country to escape.
Police union stages a go-slow strike, which allows 54 prisoners around the country to escape.
Police union stages a go-slow strike, which allows 54 prisoners around the country to escape.
Various incidents of political violence across the province.
Gunmen fire on a family, 3 die.
8 members of a family die when gunmen burst into their homestead.
Riot over unknown causes leads to one death.
In a protest over racism in the police force, black police set up blockades and keep white police from entering the station.
Over three months, 20 people are killed in clashes near a worker's hostel.
Parliamentary staff occupy the main parliament chamber and the speaker's office to demand the dismissal of white management.
Police stage wildcat strike across the country to protest against racism.  Police demanding the dismissal of a racist police chief near Cape Town strike, occupying a station and taking hostages in Soweto.  Riot police storm the place.  1 dies.
Miners clash inside a hostel for unknown reasons.  12 die.
Clashes between white and black students culminates in an arson attack on the school.
Police protest over their pay, sparking a gun battle with government forces that leaves 1 dead.
Black students protest over the conditions of their schools.  They throw rocks at the end of the march.  Police use tear gas.
Black students protest over the conditions of their schools.  They throw rocks at the end of the march.  Police use tear gas.
Students riot over school conditions, forcing the closure of campuses across the country.
Students riot over school conditions, forcing the closure of campuses across the country.
35,000 policemen stage a go-slow strike over pay.
200 Inkatha supporters march to commemorate a massacre in the city a year ago during a battle with ANC gunmen.
Ethnic clashes erupt at a mine.  Riots kill 3 in retaliation for the death of 3 miners the day before.  The dispute is later connected to conflict between natives and Shangaan immigrants from Mozambique.
Gunmen kill a police officer.  Event appears connected to divisions between rival township defense units.
Anti-immigrant violence perpetrated by Xhosas.  A dozen are injured.
Anti-immigrant violence perpetrated by Xhosas.
Prisoners across the country start hunger strikes and work go-slows to demand amnesty.
Gunmen fire on a worker's hostel.  5 die.  Later articles attach it to the ongoing violence between IFP and ANC.
20,000 supporters of the IFP march on the anniversary of elections to demand ethnic autonomy.  4 are killed in attacks as marchers return home to Umlazi.
20,000 supporters of the IFP march on the anniversary of elections to demand ethnic autonomy.  4 are killed in attacks as marchers return home to Umlazi.
IFP supporters attack a Mandela rally, killing one.  ANC and IFP supporters then clash, setting houses on fire.
Clashes between ANC and IFP supporters
COSATU organizes a march of 50,000 to show strength in the ongoing negotiations over the Labor Relations Act.
COSATU stages a strike and several massive marches to demand various labor rights.
COSATU stages a strike and several massive marches to demand various labor rights.
COSATU stages a strike and several massive marches to demand various labor rights.
2500 national park workers strike to demand higher wages.
Workers strike for higher pay against Transet, a transport conglomerate.
Political violence throughout Natal.
Clashes between Xhosa residents and Sotho migrant workers.
Gunmen attack a house, killing 3.
Thousands of women march throughout the country to celebrate women's day and to protest against poverty and violence.
85 die in violence.
Gunmen kill a senior ANC official.
40 people die in Natal violence.
The IFP stages a 40,000 strong march to demand Zulu autonomy, and part of the crowd clashes with police.
Black students demonstrate for more control over reforms at the University of South Africa.  300 students pelt police with stones.  Police return fire with rubber bullets.
Nurses strike for a wage increase at South Africa's biggest hospital (Baragwanath).
12 killed over a land dispute when gunmen open fire on a church.
A mob kills 4 police and an informant.
Human rights activists demonstrate in front of the Nigerian consulate to protest the execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa, an activist in Nigeria.
Taxi disputes over territory.
Fighting breaks out between fans of South Africa's team and fans of the Ivory Coast team.
Workers stage a brief wildcat strike to protest the government privatization program.
Black factions clash.
8 die in factional violence.
Thousands of armed IFP kill 19 ANC and burn dozens of homes.
Black factions clash.
22 die in overnight political violence.
Clashes between black factions kills 100.
2000 white right wingers protest racial discrimination.
A small group of gunmen open fire on a group of men seeking jobs at a factory, killing 8.
Killings of an unknown nature in Soweto.
60 killed in weekend violence.
6000 black parents and students march to demand that an all white school open to blacks.
57 killed in weekend violence.
60 killed in weekend violence.
700 white students boycott classes to protest the school's integration.
49 killed in weekend violence.
10,000 Zulu nationalists march to protest against the ANC led government on the anniversary of pre-election massacre in 1994.  A similar protest occurs in Umlazi, where an attack on a train kills 4.
10,000 Zulu nationalists march to protest against the ANC led government on the anniversary of pre-election massacre in 1994.  A similar protest occurs in Umlazi, where an attack on a train kills 4.
83 people die in several days of violence.
12 die in a spree of political violence.
Police make a weekend arrest sweep, and shoot and kill one.
30 men descend on the home of the Zulu king and his family and wound several, killing a princess.   The attack occurs over the fact of the Zulu kings leaning toward the ANC in upcoming local elections.
Mostly ineffective general strike staged to protest a constitutional convention.
Hundreds of Zulu nationalists storm a police station where 9 of their colleagues are held in connection with an attack on the Zulu king.
Unknown gunmen fire on a Zulu nationalist march.
A white militant stages a hunger strike to protest for immediate release from prison.
Gunmen attack a police and army foot patrol, killing 5.  Attack is linked to police investigations in the area.
Clashes between black and white university students.  Police use rubber bullets and tear gas.
Arsonists burn two government buildings.
Ongoing violence between ANC and IFP.
A man is shot returning home from a campaign resolution.
Several people wounded in clashes between police and IFP during an election rally.
Ethnic Tamils protest against the arrival of a Sri Lankan jet liner.
A gang of men kills 4 members of a Zulu family accused of witchcraft.
Parliamentary staff stage a demonstration to protest a management decision to dock a day's pay over the staff's participation in COSATU's one day general strike at the end of April.
More than 28,000 workers strike.  The company sacks them.
21,000 workers successfully re-apply for work after being fired for striking, but 7,000 are promptly fired for re-initiating the strike.
Miners strike for a wage increase.  The strike turns violent and 11 die over the course of several days.
80,000 textile workers strike over wages.
28,000 workers strike over wages.
A vigilante group marches to the home of drug lord Rashaad Staggie and then kills him.
Armed men attack a village in retaliation for the mob execution of drug dealers.
Tens of thousands of women march around the country on National Women's Day against domestic violence.
Rival unions battle in an underground mine.  Violence is ascribed to the fact that NUM supports the ANC, while the UWUSA supports the Zulu nationalist IFP.
NUM stages a demonstration marking the 50the anniversary of a strike in which 12 died.  They demand higher wages from the Chamber of Mines, a body of coal and goal mine companies.
Ethnic clash.
10,000 gays and lesbians march through the streets to demand greater rights.
Hundreds of anti-crime protesters demonstrate against drug dealers.
Thousands in the country's urban centers protest against a new bill in parliament that would legalize abortion.
Thousands in the country's urban centers protest against a new bill in parliament that would legalize abortion.
Thousands in the country's urban centers protest against a new bill in parliament that would legalize abortion.
Thousands in the country's urban centers protest against a new bill in parliament that would legalize abortion.
500 protesters rail against the government for not doing enough to combat drug dealing.  Police fire rubber bullets and use batons.  1 dies.
Unknown clans clash, killing 5.
Black factions clash.
Black factions clash.
An ethnic riot kills 32.
Black factions clash.
Violent political killings.
Terrorists detonate bombs.
A gunman kills 2.
Citizens leaving a peace-building meeting are targeted by black factions.
Mixed race people protest against discrimination of ANC government, rents, rates, and utility fees.  Protest escalates to riot, police use tear gas.
Student protests turn violent as they protest against government plan to cut state subsidies to tertiary institutions.
Student protests turn violent as they protest against government plan to cut state subsidies to tertiary institutions.
Student protests turn violent as they protest against government plan to cut state subsidies to tertiary institutions.
Student protests turn violent as they protest against government plan to cut state subsidies to tertiary institutions.
COSATU protesters prevent trucks from crossing the border into Swaziland, enforcing a blockade in support of a general strike by workers in Swaziland.
COSATU protesters prevent trucks from crossing the border into Swaziland, enforcing a blockade in support of a general strike by workers in Swaziland.
COSATU stages a protest against crime and calling on the government to take greater action against it.
Thousands of Zulus march to condemn a massacre in 1994.  As the march disperses, gunfire erupts and 2 die.
Tribes clash for unknown reasons.
Strike at a palladium mine.
Hundreds of thousands rally and strike across South Africa in support of a 40 hour work week.
4 civilians killed in two incidents in Natal.
Several hundred communist party supporters demonstrate outside the venue of a Truth and Reconciliation meeting to oppose the amnesty bid by the convicted killers of Chris Hani (see event on 4/10/1993).
8 die in factional violence.
Hundreds of thousands of unionists march to protest government labor policies.
Hundreds of thousands of unionists march to protest government labor policies.
Hundreds of thousands of unionists march to protest government labor policies.
Hundreds of thousands of unionists march to protest government labor policies.
Hundreds of thousands of unionists march to protest government labor policies.
Hundreds of thousands of unionists march to protest government labor policies.
Women stage protests against rape and domestic violence on National Women's Day.
Hundreds injured in post-match violence after South Africa qualifies for the World Cup finals for the first time.
Series of rolling general strikes as hundreds of thousands of workers strike for better working conditions and changes to the Basic Conditions of Employment Bill.  As many as 20,000 workers protest in the streets of Johannesburg and Pretoria.
Gunmen kill 8 civilians.
Gunmen kill 6 civilians.
Political motivated killings of 5 ANC supporters
Pan Africanist Congress supporters stage attacks and kill 17 farmers, wounding several others.
Supporters of the militant Pan Africanist Congress kill 12 white farmers over the course of a month.  Farmers retaliate by killing a black farm worker.
Gunmen kill 8 in politically motivated killing.
ANC supporters gun down 3 IFP supporters.
50 COSATU militants protest outside the Indonesian embassy, in protest over a visit by Indonesian president Suharto.
White farmers protest outside a courthouse where four men charged in connection to recent murders are being granted bail.
Gunmen burst into the house of gang leader and kill 4 people.
PAC supporters attack white farmers, resulting in 5 deaths.
University student demonstrate against being excluded from school for non-payment of tuition fees.
Gang violence.
70,000 security guards strike for high wages.  They protest in Johannesburg, where police use tear gas and stun grenades.
PAC supporters attack and kill white farmers.
3000 workers strike and gather in protests in multiple city centers.
3000 workers strike and gather in protests in multiple city centers.
3000 workers strike and gather in protests in multiple city centers.
Police fire tear gas at 2500 black protesters demonstrating against racial discrimination and educational conditions at a high school.  The protest erupts into a riot.
Protest march against warring gangs involved in drug dealing.  The police disperse with tear gas and rubber bullets when the marchers refuse to be searched.
School children protest ongoing war between taxi drivers.  One drivers fires into the crowd, sparking a riot in which the children burn about 80 shacks.
Taxi drivers wage war during a two week period over taxi routes.
About 50 PAC protesters turn up to protest a visit by US President Bill Clinton.
Black factions attack police investigating illegal weapons.
Scores of protesters angrily demonstrate several times against a white farmer when he appears in court on charges of murdering a black child.
2 killed in ongoing taxi war.
PAC supporters attack and kill white farmers.
Hundreds of Muslims of the Qibla organization protest against Israel on the 50th anniversary of that state's founding.
ANC gunmen shoot and kill two Inkatha leaders.
170,000 teachers start a go-slow to protest for higher wages.
A black faction ambushes members of another watching the World Cup.
Unknown attackers kill members of a family belonging to an organization that reports on cattle rustling.
PAC supporters attack white farmers.
Violence erupts between ANC supporters and those of the United Democratic Movement.
Violence erupts between ANC supporters and those of the United Democratic Movement.
21,000 autoworkers strike for higher wages.
Feuding factions of the IFP do battle, 6 die.
A bomb explodes at a Planet Hollywood, killing 1.  The bomb plot is connected to anti-Americanism in the wake of US bombings in Sudan and Afghanistan.  PAGAD is later implicated.
500 people of the Muslims Against Global Oppression protest against the United States.
Thousands of workers strike in the motor component sector.
Feuding factions of the IFP do battle, 7 die.
Employees strike for better wages.
Gunmen kill 3 ANC leaders.
The mayor of a small municipality in Johannesburg is assassinated for taking tough action on service payment defaults.
A mob kills a woman who admitted to having AIDS.
IFP supporters set fire to 16 ANC supporters.
Gunmen kill 6 in incident ascribed to faction fighting.
3000 workers strike at AMPLAT's mines nationwide.
Six men are hacked to death during a clash between black factions.
Gunmen kill 8 at a Christmas Eve party.
Gunmen kill 3 in Natal.
Gunmen kill 4.
A car bomb explodes.  Incident linked to gangs.
About 30 protesters of a small right wing party protest at the British embassy during a visit by Tony Blair.  They demand an apology for the Boer Wars.
About 200 Muslims protest against the US and the UK for ongoing airstrikes against Iraq.  Police use tear gas and rubber bullets.  1 dies when he is struck in the head by a rubber bullet.
Muslim groups protest against the death of one of their own during protests on Jan. 8.
A policeman investigating PAGAD violence is shot dead.
The founder of the United Democratic Movement is assassinated.  Gunmen  then massacre 11 ANC officials a day later.  About 100 youths from the ANC and the UDM clash. Police disperse them with tear gas.
The founder of the United Democratic Movement is assassinated.  Gunmen  then massacre 11 ANC officials a day later.  About 100 youths from the ANC and the UDM clash. Police disperse them with tear gas.
A UDM official is assassinated in his home in Cape Town.
A bomb explodes outside police headquarters, not far from Nelson Mandela's offices.  The bomb is ascribed to the approaching elections.
A bomb is hurled from a passing car and explodes in front of a police station.
Unspecified factions do battle, 6 die.
A politician who left the IFP and joined the ANC is beaten.
An ANC and a UDM official are shot dead during a voter registration drive.  A series of revenge assassinations continues for a day after that.
500 members of the Chinese community march to the home of Nelson Mandela to protest the country's crime rates.
Vigilante group PAGAD attacks Rashied Staggie, leader of Hard Livings gang.
Gunmen shoot and wound a patrol of soldiers.
3 gunmen burst into the house of a Chinese anti-crime advocate and kill him.
A group of over 10 armed men attack and kill 4 alleged cattle rustlers.
A group of more than 100 students stones and beats their principal over the redeployment of some teachers to other schools.
A mob kills 4 women accused of being witches.
A large rally of 20,000 people is held.  It erupts into violence when UDF protesters clash with ANC supporters and the police.  Police fire rubber bullets into the march.
Gunmen from a rival tribe attack a village, going from hut to hut and killing 6.
Scattered political violence between ANC and UDM supporters in advance of the election.
UDM fighters chase about 700 ANC supporters out of the town.
Violence of unknown motive.  Gunmen kill a taxi driver and two passengers.
Students begin rioting when they are refused refunds for a field trip.  The teachers respond by opening fire on the students, killing 1.
IFP supporters demonstrate against an ANC election team, forcing them to leave the town.
ANC demonstrators prevent IFP candidates and New National Party candidates from speaking and holding rallies.
ANC demonstrators prevent IFP candidates and New National Party candidates from speaking and holding rallies.
A petrol bomb explodes at an ANC politician's house.
ANC supporters interrupt a UDM rally and shout down the speaker.
A petrol bomb explodes at a UDM politician's house.
Almost 1000 ANC supporters take over a UDM rally.
Politically motivated killing of two female ANC members.
Politically motivated killing of two female ANC members.
Politically motivated killing of an ANC supporter on election day.
Politically motivated killing of an ANC supporter on election day.
The NNP and the DP form a coalition in Western Cape to keep the plurality party, the ANC, out of power in the province.  ANC supporters march on the provincial legislature and then riot, attempting to storm the legislature.
The rape and murder of a 14 year old girl triggers mob violence and demonstrations.  The mob demolishes the house where the attack occurred.
300 AIDS activists protest at the US consulate to protest against the high price of drugs from the US.
1000 laid off miners protest against Britain, which has sold off 25 tons of gold and depressed the world gold price.
A feeble picket against job cuts.  Numbers unknown.
4000 miners strike over the planned sacking of 900 workers.
5000 miners and mine owners demonstrate against the Swiss and British decision to sell gold reserves, depressing the world gold price.
Tens of thousands of people demonstrate and strike during their lunch hours against pressure from the US to lower trade barriers, the importation of cheap Chinese goods, and the loss of jobs in the economy.
Workers strike during their lunch hours in Middleburg against foreign economic pressures for structural reform and falling gold prices.  There is a riot and police use rubber bullets.
Massive protests of 50,000 people all around the country, demonstrating in favor of wage increases and threatening strike actions.
Series of public sector strikes involving over 300,000 workers demanding wage increases.  Protests accompany the strike in Cape Town.
1200 protesters march on parliament to demonstrate against the Arms and Ammunition Amendment Bill that raises the cost of gun licenses.
Unknown number of students protest against the management of a technical university, expressing solidarity with other workers who have had issues with management.  The protest escalates to a riot.
17,000 communications workers and 5,000 postal workers strike against the government owned telecom company (Telkom) over wage issues.  Large protests erupt in Pretoria, Cape Town, and other large cities.
Miners stage nationwide strikes over pay issues.  Strikes start in localized areas, and then spread across the coal and gold industries, affecting areas nationwide.
Gunmen shoot and kill nine people at a house accused of harboring criminals.
About 60 protesters demonstrate at the Indonesian embassy over the treatment of East Timor.
A COSATU backed general strike over wages in the public sector.  As many as 800,000 people strike and at least 100,000 march in cities around South Africa.
About 1000 IFP supporters march to protest the denial of amnesty to IFP members from the government's Truth and Reconciliation Committee.
A black soldier goes on a shooting spree and kills several of his white colleagues in a racially motivated attack.
Police fire live rounds and teargas at a crowd of 2000 at a racially charged funeral.
Thousands of fish processors strike for better wages.
Cyril Zulu, a member of the Zulu royal family and mayor-designate of Durban, is assassinated.
Taxi associations wage war, killing 7.
Unknown bombers set off a bomb at a bar frequented by gays.
Dozens of Afrikaner protesters demonstrate against a state visit by the Queen, demanding that Britain apologize for the Boer War.
Community members attack a gang, the Terrible Josters, killing 3.  Another person is killed when shot by police.  1000 people then march on the police station demanding they be allowed to burn the gang member's bodies.
Attackers stone a Zulu prince.
Unknown bombers set off a bomb at a restaurant.
Unknown bombers set off a bomb at a restaurant.
500 Muslims of Qibla protest in front of the US and Russian consulates while condemning Russia's actions in Chechnya.
Unknown bombers attac a courthouse, injuring several.  PAGAD is suspected.
1400 auto workers stage an illegal strike against Volkswagen.
A busload of former South African miners attacks Mozambican miners, wounding 21.
Gunmen kill an IFP official and 4 members of his family.
16 jailed members of PAGAD begin a hunger strike protesting the persecution of Muslims in South Africa.
A black faction attacks a van, killing its occupants in a local power struggle.
200 people march to Parliament to protest the government's low key response to unrest in Zimbabwe.
One day general strike observed by hundreds of thousands of people.  Protests erupt in most of the major cities.  Workers demand payments for laid off workers and try to force the government to slow the pace of tariff reductions.
Residents protest against warring taxi drivers, clash with police.  1 dies.
Students riot to protest the expulsion of 700 students.  Police use deadly force, killing one.
Bus drivers march to the Western Cape provincial parliament to demand government action to end a turf war between taxi drivers that has killed two bus drivers.
A car bomb explodes in Cape Town. PAGAD is suspected.
South African investigators shut down an investment company, accusing it of being a pyramid scheme.  Thousands of investors protest against the government for months afterward.
A small group of protesters demonstrates against a visit by the chief of the IMF.  Numbers unknown.
20 activists from Act Up protest against the WHO, accusing it of selling out to pharmaceutical companies.
A car bomb explodes in Cape Town. PAGAD is suspected.
7 die in a turf war between gangs.
The all white MWU protests against the government's affirmative action policies.
PAGAD gunmen assassinate a Cape Town magistrate.
A bomb explodes near a Mosque and an opposition party meeting.
A judge is assassinated.  Further details unknown.
A car bomb explodes outside a caf?.
Between 9,000 and 10,000 workers strike at six platinum mines over a wage dispute.
A taxi is attacked during the ongoing taxi wars.  Another is killed in Umtata.
A taxi is attacked during the ongoing taxi wars.  Another is killed in Umtata.
The ANC organizes about 100 protesters to demonstrate against Israel.
Muslims march on the US embassy.  The march turns violent and two policemen are stabbed.
About 2000 Muslims protest Israel's actions during the Palestinian uprising.  After the march, a pro-Palestinian mob breaks off the from the main body and attacks a McDonald's restaurant.
A bomb explodes outside an opposition party office.
The SACP organizes protests around the country against the banks, alleging that they are not doing enough to fight poverty.
12000 people march to government headquarters demanding that the government take action against crime.
Religious leaders organize a march of 2000 men to protest violence against women and children.
Irate South African soccer fans begin rioting after Nigeria scores a goal.  Police arrive and fire tear gas into the crowd.
Trade unionists demonstrate at the border crossing to push for democracy in Swaziland.
6 die during a shooting at a polling station.
Tens of thousands of security guards strike for pay and benefits.  They protest in several cities.  The protest in Johannesburg turns violent.
200 stone throwing people riot when police arrive to make arrests of suspects in the country's ongoing taxi wars.  Police fire rubber and live bullets into the crowd.  No one dies.
Hundreds of farmers burn tires and blockade roads to protest delays in a decision on their land claim.
Commuters riot at a train station when some trains are late.  They start a fire, burning several buildings.
6000 postal workers strike against changes in their contracts reducing pay for Sunday overtime.
ANC protesters claim that the Democratic Alliance is carrying out community uplift programs only in areas where their supporters live.  The protesters begin throwing rocks at the police, who respond with live ammunition, wounding 5.
A stampede erupts after a goal is scored at a soccer game.  43 die.
Trade unionists protest against privatization.
Trade unionists protest against privatization.
200 protesters demonstrate against the rule of Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe and the South African government's quiet diplomacy towards him.
Black farmers wage a campaign of arson against mixed race farms they claim were taken from them in the early 20th century.
Hundreds of youth join the President in retracing the steps of the historic protest march in 1976.
7 people are shot dead in the ongoing taxi war.
7 people are shot dead in the ongoing taxi war.
20,000 workers at the Eskom utility company strike over a pay dispute.
21,000 auto workers strike in favor of a salary hike.
Police fire tear gas a hundreds of protesters who stone cars and block streets, demanding the government provide them with land and houses.
Steel workers strike for higher pay and benefits.
5400 miners down tools to demand better wages and benefits.
Hundreds of taxi drivers protest against the restructuring of their industry, in which vans will be replaced with mini-buses, throwing thousands out of work.
Tens of thousands organized by COSATU protest in favor of wage increases and an end to privatization.  Some also protest against the US decision to boycott the Durban conference on racism.
15000 people of the organization Muslim South Africans protest against Israel's handling of the Palestinian uprising and against the US decision to boycott the Durban racism conference.
An Afrikaner group demonstrates against the killing of thousands of white farmers as a result of racial violence.
Protesters disrupt a youth racism conference, protesting against Israeli actions in the Palestinian uprising and US involvement in Puerto Rico.
General strike stages against government privatization scheme.  Large rallies held in most major cities.
17,000 people demonstrate at the UN conference on racism.  They protest against Israeli actions, landlessness, American actions, slavery, and racism.  Local South Africans target their own government over landlessness and racism.
60 Indian low caste Dalits stage a hunger strike to demand that the global conference address caste based discrimination.
Racially motivated gang violence and mobs rampage against the shops of Somali migrants.
Riots occur between South African and Zimbabwean residents of a shack settlement.  The conflict is sparked when a S. African women is killed by a Zimbabwean man a month prior.
Taxi drivers wage war.
Taxi drivers wage war.
3000 men organized by Anglican bishops protest against rape and domestic violence against women and children.
Port workers strike over pay issues.
Port workers strike over pay issues.
Port workers strike over pay issues.
Several hundred people march, calling on the government to more to stamp out child abuse.
Unspecified factions do battle, 9 die.
Gunmen kill 7 belonging to a community policing group.
2600 immigrants riot at a repatriation center, demanding immediate repatriation.
Several hundred commuters riot at a station when some trains are not running.  They kill a person and torch several buildings.
IFP protest organized to protest against legislation that allows lawmakers to defect to other parties.  The protest turns violent and one man is wounded by a gunshot.
The LPM marches to demand the end of the forceful removal of people from land.  Police arrest many.
500 protesters of the APF demonstrate against globalization and privatization. Police use stun grenades.
12 Greenpeace activists attempt to scale a building near a nuclear power station to protest nuclear power in Africa.
At a UN Earth Day summit, Zimbabweans and Ethiopians protest against rigged elections in their home countries.
At least 10,000 protesters march in Alexandra to protest against globalization, the environment, and the United States during a UN summit on the environment.
100 students protest against a speech by Israeli foreign minister Shimon Peres.  Police fire water cannons at the demonstrators.
5 Greenpeace activists protest at an oil refinery in Durban.
300 demonstrators burn tires and block traffic to protest against city authorities that are evicting people for failing to pay rent.
Tens of thousands of people protest and strike against government privatization plans.
Two white extremists set off a bomb.
Right-wing group launches bombing campaign to target black citizens.
Unknown gunmen kill 8 at a gay parlor.
A Zulu prince is assassinated.
Gunmen kill 7 people in KwaMaye.
Thousands of AIDS activists march to demand that the government implement a national treatment plan.
Protests against the upcoming Iraq War.
Protests against the upcoming Iraq War.
Protests against the upcoming Iraq War.
Gangs do battle, 4 bystanders die.
An activist group stages a sit in to protest government actions surrounding the AIDS epidemic.
An activist group stages a sit in to protest government actions surrounding the AIDS epidemic.
Small groups of protesters picket US consulates to demonstrate against the Iraq War.
Small groups of protesters picket US consulates to demonstrate against the Iraq War.
The MDC stages a protest against the Zimbabwean government and the South African policy towards it.
Hundreds protest against the US led war in Iraq, criticizing Australia's involvement at a cricket match between Australia and India.
Protest against the Iraq War.
Anti war protesters call on the government to stop military dealings with the US and the UK.
Hundreds of Zimbabweans protest the lack of the rule of law in their home country.
Protesters turn out to demonstrate against a visit by the US president and US policies in Iraq.
Protesters turn out to demonstrate against a visit by the US president and US policies in Iraq.
Protesters turn out to demonstrate against a visit by the US president and US policies in Iraq.
Protesters gather outside a conference on AIDS.  Numbers unknown.
Ongoing violence between taxi drivers leads to the death of 6 people.
IFP and ANC supporters clash in the run up to an election.  3 injured.
IFP and ANC supporters clash in the run up to an election.  9 injured.
Doctors march to protest for better working conditions, better pay, and to demand that the government help the public health sector.
4 killed in clashes during the run up to an election.
4 killed in clashes during the run up to an election.
A DA councilor is shot in an ambush the night before an election.
Families of 70 suspected mercenaries held in Zimbabwe on charges of plotting a coup in Equatorial Guinea stage a protest march to press the S. African government to help the men.
More than 1000 pharmacists stage a 3 hour strike across South Africa to protest a new law that cuts their profit margins.  Pharmacists stage a protest outside their shops in Cape Town.
More than 400 white supporters of a jailed white supremacist celebrate as he is released from jail.  A large crowd of black protesters shouts him down.
Some 200 supporters of the MDC shout down a Zimbabwean official as he is about to address a meeting called by Zimbabwe's Reserve Bank governor in South Africa.
Hundreds of demonstrators march outside US consulates to protest US policies on AIDS.
Hundreds of demonstrators march outside US consulates to protest US policies on AIDS.
Residents riot to protest eviction announcement.  Police respond with rubber bullets.
270,000 workers strike to press for a wage increase.  15,000 metal workers protest through Johannesburg.
Tens of thousands of teachers march across South Africa to press for better wages and warning of a strike.
Eight public sector unions organize one of the biggest strikes since the end of Apartheid.  800,000 teachers, police, health workers, and civil servants strike for better wages.  Tens of thousands march in South Africa's cities.
2500 black gun owners march to protest a new firearms law.
23,000 workers strike at several major platinum mines in South Africa, demanding better wages.    500 workers protest at the entrance to the Anglo mine, and police fire on them with rubber bullets.
Hundreds of Muslims mark the start of Ramadan with marches to protest a visit by deputy prime minister of Israel Ehud Olmert.
Hundreds of Muslims mark the start of Ramadan with marches to protest a visit by deputy prime minister of Israel Ehud Olmert.
Hundreds of Muslims mark the start of Ramadan with marches to protest a visit by deputy prime minister of Israel Ehud Olmert.
A few dozen protesters demonstrate outside a convention center where Israel and South Africa are signing an investment agreement.
Gunmen shoot dead Mandla Shabalala, a member of the IFP national council.
Black protesters gather outside the trial of a group of alleged white murderers who are accused of beating a black man and throwing him over the fence of a lion preserve, where he was devoured.
Scores of rampaging youths torch 39 homes in an apparent witch hunt.  When the police intervene, a man is killed in the crossfire.
A strike occurs when 30,000 truckers walk off the job.  The strike escalates into a demonstration and a clash with police in Johannesburg.  The police use rubber bullets.
COSATU sponsors a poorly attended picket to protest in favor of democracy in Zimbabwe.
More than 1000 Zimbabweans protesters gather outside the Zimbabwean embassy and hold a mock vote.
300 marchers organized by COSATU march to the Zimbabwean border on the eve of elections in that country.
Over 50,000 gold miners strike for higher wages.  At Harmony, there is also an issue of racism, with blacks accusing the company of paying them less than whites.
500 miners stage a sit-in inside an underground coal mine to protest the sale of the mine to an Australian mining group.  Up to 1200 miners join the strike.  The miners seek guarantees from the future owners, Riversdale Mining, that benefits an
Thousands in poor townships and cities across the country protest and riot against poor living conditions, including poor access to housing and basic services.  Police in the townships around Cape Town use tear gas and rubber bullets.
3000 white Afrikaners protest against government plans to rename the capital from Pretoria to Tshwane.
Several hundred people demonstrate against plans by Britain's Barclays to return to retail banking in South Africa, where it was infamous for links to the Apartheid regime.
Thousands of transport workers strike for higher wages.
Up to 2 million people participate in a massive strike and participate in more than 20 marches around the country.  COSATU demands that businesses save jobs and buy locally, and that retailers stock local products.
Hundreds of township protesters demonstrate against lack of housing and access to basic services, threaten to riot.
Thousands of municipal workers strike in cities across the country.  Workers march to city hall in Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg, and other cities, demanding a wage increase.
5000 SAA staff walk off the job at Johannesburg International Airport to demand a wage increase.
Workers at a supermarket giant strike for better salaries.
Thousands of municipal workers strike across the country, with thousands marching in cities nationwide.
The first national strike in the gold mining industry in 18 years.  Over 100,000 miners strike for higher wages.
Close to 80,000 workers stage a national strike against municipal governments across the country.  Riots erupt in several cities, triggering police action with stun grenades and rubber bullets.
Protests occur during a court appearance by dismissed Deputy President Jacob Zuma, who is charged with rape.
1300 members of the Treatment Action Campaign demonstrate to protest the MCC's lack of action against an official who says that his micronutrient supplements cure AIDS and the antiretroviral medicines are toxic.
Angry commuters burn 28 coaches because some trains are late.
Thousands of dismissed Deputy President Jacob Zuma's supporters demonstrate in his favor as he is indicted for rape.
30,000 Muslim protesters demonstrate against Danish cartoons depicting Mohammed.
30,000 Muslim protesters demonstrate against Danish cartoons depicting Mohammed.
Four gunmen assassinate a newly elected municipal councilor of the ruling ANC.
As the rape trial for South Africa's ousted deputy president resumes, supporters and opponents gather outside the courthouse to protest.
Metrorail workers strike during a  restructuring of the parastatal Metrorail, fearful that the plan will jeopardize their pensions.
30,000 security guards strike over wage issues, and stage riots in several cities, including Cape Town.  As many as 60 are killed when striking guards target scab labor and throw them from moving trains.
More than 200 HIV prison inmates stage a two day hunger strike to demand free  treatment.
Hundreds of unionists stage a blockade at posts on the Swaziland border to protest the lack of political reform in that country.  The police fire rubber bullets into the crowd.
5000 people protest and then cheer on the day that Jacob Zuma is acquitted of rape.
216,000 unionists stage a strike to protest unemployment.  Many demonstrations and rallies are held across the country.
Thousands of South Africans led by President Mbeki and other ANC supporters march through Soweto to commemorate the anniversary of the Soweto Uprising in 1976.
A rally by the SACP calls for the end to a graft charge leveled against sacked deputy president Jacob Zuma.
Thousands of chanting supporters protest outside a court where sacked deputy president Jacob Zuma is beginning a trial for graft.
Thousands march through Cape Town to Parliament to demand sanctions against Israel as a result of its campaign in Lebanon.  They carry pictures of the leader of Hezbollah.
Dozens of activists briefly occupy offices in the provincial government in Cape Town, then march to the Human Rights Commission to pressure it to play a bigger role in securing treatment for AIDS patients.
TAC stages a protest to demand the resignation of the country's health minister due to his response to the AIDS epidemic.
200 protesters protest against the graft trial of Jacob Zuma.
2000 people organized by the Democratic Alliance protest against a plan by the ANC to eliminate the mayoral post in Cape Town and replace it with a committee, thus giving the ANC control over Cape Town.
Taxi drivers riot to protest police harassment.
ANC stages a demonstration to protest against lack of service delivery in poor suburbs.  This protest occurs to counter the DA protest from a day prior.
Hundreds protest against child killers as a man appears in court over the killing of a girl.
Hundreds protest against child killers as a man appears in court over the killing of a girl.
About 100 people protest to demand the release of all opposition activists arrested in a crackdown in Zimbabwe.
40 members of an Ethiopian opposition party protest at that Pan African Parliament to accuse the Ethiopian government of illegally detaining opposition members.
Tens of thousands of public sector unionists protest for higher wages.
Just short of a million people in the public sector strike for higher pay, supported by COSATU.  Tens of thousands protest in the streets.  Police fire stun grenades in Cape Town when protesters block doctors from entering a hospital.
Riots of unknown size in Free State.  Rioters protest poor living conditions in the projects and poor service delivery.  An ANC councilor is hacked to death.
About 200,000 workers strike for higher pay.
Riots of unknown size in Johannesburg's townships over conditions in the housing projects.
500 tenants of a housing project march on parliament to protest shoddy construction and high rent.
Fuel sector workers strike for higher pay, triggering shortages.
More than 200 women march on parliament to protest high levels of violence against children.
An Apartheid era police minister goes to trial.  Black protesters demonstrate against an amnesty deal, while a rival protest erupts (organized by Afriforum) in favor of prosecuting ANC officials.
About 500 people march against houses where drugs are sold.  The leader of the opposition Democratic Alliance is arrested.
Residents of a housing project blockade a nearby highway to protest poor living conditions and service provision.
Students protest fee hikes.  Police use water cannons.
Construction workers building the stadium for the 2010 World Cup strike over poor pay.
Factions of the National Union of Mineworkers clash at a mine, resulting in two deaths.
Construction workers building the stadium for the 2010 World Cup strike over poor pay.
270,000 mineworkers strike over safety.  Tens of thousands march in Johannesburg.  On average, 1 miner dies each day due to insufficient safety.
A white youth enters an informal settlement and kills 4 blacks in a racially motivated attack.  A few days later, a mob appears at his trial to protest him.
Construction workers building the stadium for the 2010 World Cup strike over poor pay.
Riots erupt at the University of the Free State after a video surfaces showing white students duping black employees into eating food that had been urinated on.  Police use a stun grenade.
A xenophobic mob kills two foreigners accused of taking jobs away from locals.
200 diamond miners strike to press for better pay.
About 100 supporters of the MDC march to protest a delay in election results in Zimbabwe.  The march starts in Zimbabwe and ends in the town of Musina.  About 100 protest at the Zimbabwean embassy in Pretoria.
About 100 supporters of the MDC march to protest a delay in election results in Zimbabwe.  The march starts in Zimbabwe and ends in the town of Musina.  About 100 protest at the Zimbabwean embassy in Pretoria.
About 1500 unionists organized by COSATU march to a branch of the Pick n Pay retail chain to protest rising food prices.
Angry mobs rampage through Johannesburg inner city suburbs, attacking foreigners over jobs and access to housing.  Police use rubber bullets on rioting mobs.  On the 21st, the violence spreads to Durban and violence is reported in Cape Town.
Angry mobs rampage through Johannesburg inner city suburbs, attacking foreigners over jobs and access to housing.  Police use rubber bullets on rioting mobs.  On the 21st, the violence spreads to Durban and violence is reported in Cape Town.
Angry mobs rampage through Johannesburg inner city suburbs, attacking foreigners over jobs and access to housing.  Police use rubber bullets on rioting mobs.  On the 21st, the violence spreads to Durban and violence is reported in Cape Town.
A trade dispute between two men escalates when one of them, a Somali, pulls a gun a shoots the other.  A mob then pursues the man and then proceeds to loot several Somali shops in the area.
A mob burns a Mozambican man alive after accusing him of setting fire to a shack.
The metro police strike over salary rates and nepotism, stage protests.  The violence eventually escalates when striking police fire live rounds at national police using rubber bullets.
Thousands of trade unionists march to protest rising fuel and food costs.
Hundreds of migrants from Congo and Burundi camp by a busy road to protest their treatment by the government.
Thousands of supporters of Jacob Zuma protest outside a courthouse to denounce corruption charges brought against him.
Millions of workers stage a general strike and march in protest across the country to demonstrate against high electricity and food prices.
Hundreds protest outside a regional summit against dictatorship in Zimbabwe and Swaziland.
A Lesotho man stabs a Zimbabwean in a tavern, causing a fight to break out.  50 people riot and then burn shacks belonging to Zimbabwean immigrants.  Police use rubber bullets.
Protesters riot to protest against graft charges brought against Jacob Zuma.
Thousands of people gather to demand that charges are dropped against Jacob Zuma.
200 people hold a protest on the S. African side of the border crossing to show solidarity with Swaziland's voters.
400 ANC dissident supporters of Thabo Mbeki gather to protest against the current leadership of the ANC.  500 people gather outside the rally to support Jacob Zuma and the current ANC leadership.
Human rights activists stage a hunger strike at a church to demand political change in Zimbabwe.
Gunmen shoot dead the chairman of the ANC Youth League for Umgababa as he campaigns for an upcoming election.
Gunmen shoot dead an ANC official in the run up to an election.
IFP supporters block buses carrying ANC supporters to a rally.  9 members of the ANC are wounded or shot in scattered incidents of violence throughout the province.  These events occur as the ANC activists campaign for an upcoming election.
500 police strike and protest, demanding that local authorities suspend senior officers for corruption.
Construction workers building the stadium for the 2010 World Cup strike over poor pay.
Residents of a poor black neighborhood take to throwing rocks at passing cars to protest poor public services.
Government doctors stage an illegal strike and picket during lunch hours in favor of higher wages.  Hundreds of doctors are eventually fired.
A leader in an opposition political party is shot dead as the country begins voting in an election.
Bus drivers strike over a wage dispute.
Government doctors protest in favor of higher wages.
Union workers march in the streets to demand a drastic interest rate cut.
SABC workers strike over a pay dispute.
Some 70,000 construction workers at the World Cup stadium sites strike over a wage dispute.  The strike goes violent in Cape Town, with protesting workers throwing stones and rioting.  The police use stun grenades.
Some 70,000 construction workers at the World Cup stadium sites strike over a wage dispute.  The strike goes violent in Cape Town, with protesting workers throwing stones and rioting.  The police use stun grenades.
Some 70,000 construction workers at the World Cup stadium sites strike over a wage dispute.  The strike goes violent in Cape Town, with protesting workers throwing stones and rioting.  The police use stun grenades.
Some 70,000 construction workers at the World Cup stadium sites strike over a wage dispute.  The strike goes violent in Cape Town, with protesting workers throwing stones and rioting.  The police use stun grenades.
Some 70,000 construction workers at the World Cup stadium sites strike over a wage dispute.  The strike goes violent in Cape Town, with protesting workers throwing stones and rioting.  The police use stun grenades.
500 miners stage a sit-in in an underground mine and briefly hold a number of supervisors hostage.
Protesters riot to protest moves to demolish shacks to make way for sewage lines.  Protesters burn police cars and buildings, stone passing cars.
Protesters riot and stone police cars in anger at their dire housing conditions.  Police fire rubber bullets.
When the mayor of Balfour speaks to a crowd, his convoy is stoned and police use rubber bullets.  The protest is over living conditions.  About 50 people march in Balfour the next day.  In the city of Durban, two grocery stores are looted.
Municipal workers strike over pay, stage protest marches in several major cities.  Several of these marches degenerate into violence and looting.
Municipal workers strike over pay, stage protest marches in several major cities.  Several of these marches degenerate into violence and looting.
Municipal workers strike over pay, stage protest marches in several major cities.  Several of these marches degenerate into violence and looting.
Protesters block roads, stone a police station, and burn tires in a riot over poor service delivery and dire housing conditions.  Police use rubber bullets.
Demonstrators stone police and block off streets in a protest over lack of service delivery.  Police use rubber bullets.
Workers at the para-statal Telkom strike to demand pay increases.
Up to 2000 soldiers stage an illegal march to demand better salaries, they riot and burn a police car and nearly storm the seat of government.  Police use water cannons, rubber bullets, and tear gas.
Platinum miners strike over a pay dispute.  A protest turns violent and police use rubber bullets.
Taxi drivers stage a go slow strike to protest the launching of a bus rapid transit system.  The next day, two people are injured when shots are fired on a bus from a taxi.
Protests begin in Standerton and then spread to Belfast, Sakhile, Diepsloot, and Nelspruit.  Protesters throw rocks and torch municipal offices to protest poor living conditions.  Police disperse with rubber bullets.
Protests begin in Standerton and then spread to Belfast, Sakhile, Diepsloot, and Nelspruit.  Protesters throw rocks and torch municipal offices to protest poor living conditions.  Police disperse with rubber bullets.
Protests begin in Standerton and then spread to Belfast, Sakhile, Diepsloot, and Nelspruit.  Protesters throw rocks and torch municipal offices to protest poor living conditions.  Police disperse with rubber bullets.
Protests begin in Standerton and then spread to Belfast, Sakhile, Diepsloot, and Nelspruit.  Protesters throw rocks and torch municipal offices to protest poor living conditions.  Police disperse with rubber bullets.
Protesters demanding jobs from a mine torch a local library.
Taxi drivers protest, set tires on fire, and block roads.  Police use rubber bullets.
Protesters barricade the R50 highway and stone passing cars, torch buildings, and so forth during a service delivery protest.  Police arrest 29.
Municipal workers strike over pay.
Police searching for a fugitive storm a house and shoot a boy inside.
A pair of black local farm employees kill Eugene Terre'Blanch, leader of the Afrikaaner Resistance Front, in a dispute over pay at his farm.
Blacks and whites angrily face off in front of the court house where Eugene Terre'Blanche's killers are charged with murder.
18,000 port and rail workers strike for higher wages.
Bus drivers strike for a day.
A riot erupts as stewards at a World Cup stadium demand higher pay in Durban.  Stewards then begin striking.  Bus drivers strike after delivering fans to a World Cup match in Johannesburg.  World Cup security officials strike in Cape Town.
A riot erupts as stewards at a World Cup stadium demand higher pay in Durban.  Stewards then begin striking.  Bus drivers strike after delivering fans to a World Cup match in Johannesburg.  World Cup security officials strike in Cape Town.
A riot erupts as stewards at a World Cup stadium demand higher pay in Durban.  Stewards then begin striking.  Bus drivers strike after delivering fans to a World Cup match in Johannesburg.  World Cup security officials strike in Cape Town.
Hundreds protest to demand that the government lavish the same spending on the poor as for the World Cup.
A lone gunman assassinates an exiled Rwandan general and opposition leader accused of being behind grenade attacks in his home country.
Seven people are arrested for public violence after weekend looting forces scores of immigrants to abandon their shops.
A mob beats three thieves to death after they steal electrical wiring, causing blackouts.  Two others are beaten to death for wearing stolen cloths.
Guards shoot and kill four illegal miners.
Hundreds of thousands of civil servants, teachers, doctors, nurses, and others strike and protest for higher pay.  Riots erupt, and police use rubber bullets.
Squatters throw rocks and set fires to protest police efforts to clear shacks from a Cape Town nature reserve.  Police use rubber bullets and live ammunition.
Police raid apartments linked to a Nigerian man facing terrorism charges, killing one tenant and wounding another.
300 protesters at the Egyptian embassy hold a solidarity demonstration for pro-democracy revolutionaries in Egypt.
Violent strikes and protests occur over the provision of basic services.  The protesters burn tires, throw stones, and exchange gunfire with the police.
Violent strikes and protests occur over the provision of basic services.  The protesters burn tires, throw stones, and exchange gunfire with the police.
Truckers stage a stay-away to protest their poor wages.
25 activists protest outside parliament against corrective rape
Protesters decry lack of basic services.  The police beat one man to death.
Construction works protest, shutting down construction of two coal-fired power plants, to decry the hiring of foreign-born workers.
Construction works protest, shutting down construction of two coal-fired power plants, to decry the hiring of foreign-born workers.
Doctors march to the seat of South Africa's government to protest poor security at public hospitals.
180,000 workers  in the oil refining, pharmaceutical, industrial chemical, and engineering industries strike to demand better pay.  Strikers march and violently clash with police.
200,000 municipal workers strike to demand higher wages.  Workers march and riot in Cape Town.
The ANC Youth League violently protests against the leadership of the ANC party in a dispute over basic service provision and growing inequality.
Violence erupts in squatter apartments over lack of housing.
The ANC Youth League organizes a march to demand jobs.
Police fire shots to break up a protest by supporters of the opposition of DRC's government.
Demonstrators threw stones and blocked roads to demand ANC leaders be fired for failing to deliver basic services such as water.
Woman was trampled to death in stampede as thousands tried to submit application for university enrollment.
Around 13,000 miners went on illegal strike to demand higher wages, strike ended when company fired employees. Mine is just outside of Rustenburg.
Few demonstrators were seen outside of ANC headquarters during  youth leader Julius Malema's appeal of suspension from party.
Feeder-bus drivers for high-speed rail company went on strike to demand transport to and from work, strike ended when company fired strikers.
Feeder-bus drivers for high-speed rail company went on strike to demand transport to and from work, strike ended when company fired strikers.
Rangers in Kruger National Park went on strike with other conservation staff to demand equal pay for similar positions.
Impala Platinum re-hired striking workers, strike commenced again.
Workers demonstrated at mine over deal between company and union, police station torched and looting occurred. Arrests made, 1 killed in clashes between rival groups of workers.
Striking miners clashed with police as they attempted to burn mine shaft, miner killed by gunfire.
Students blocked roads, threw stones and iron rods at police after university refused students who failed exams to re-take them. 1 student fell to death, police fired rubber bullets.
Citizens demonstrated to demand ANC do more for the poor, combat corruption and icompetence in politics, and protest plans for toll roads.
Stone-throwing citizens rioted to protest choice of Soweto as location to commemorate massacre, police fired rubber bullets and made arrests.
Citizens in poor communities protested against slow pace of basic services delivery.
17-year-old girl was gang raped, video of rape was spread by cell phones throughout country.
AWB members held demonstrations outside mruder trial of black farmworkers accused of killing white supremacist calling for justice against killing of farmers.
Students demonstrated during bail hearing of hip-hop star facing murder charges, Molemo Maarohanye (known as Jub Jub). Riots broke out when he was granted bail.
DA party marched to promote youth subisdy, COSATU supporters counter-protested and threw rocks at DA leader. Police sprayed water hoses.
Mine workers went on strike due to arrest of suspects in clashes between unions and prior violence.
Clashes took place between unions at Impala Platinum mine, several arrested.
ANC staged a march to protest display of painting of President Zuma with his genitals exposed.
ANC staged a march to protest display of painting of President Zuma with his genitals exposed.
AWB supporters of murder victim demonstrated outside courthouse wielding flags with swastika-like emblem, scuffled with black supporters of farmworker found guilty of killing.
ANC supporters marched on art gallery that displayed painting of President Zuma with his genitals exposed.
Strike occurred at Aquarius Platinum, related to feud between unions. 3 people killed.
Gunmen attacked judge's house, tied family to their beds, ransacked house, and stole belongings.
Young gay man was killed and his body and genitals mutilated in manner that indicates a hate crime.
 made in area, concerned with anti-Israeli nature of move.
Anglo American Platinum was hit with a weeklong work stoppage.
5 were killed when gunmen opened fire during a traditional coming-of-age ceremony, attack was part of a feud between 2 clans.
9 members of vigilante group were shot dead in revenge attack by local villagers after they beat man suspected of stealing cattle.
Mine workers walked off of job, initiating strike over salary dispute.
Mine workers walked off of job over salary dispute, workers attempting to go to work injured by rival union.
Strife over Lonmin mine worker salary dispute resulted in 7 dead. 2 police killed, 3 killed when police opened fire, 2 other miners killed in attacks.
Mine workers demonstrated over salary dispute at mine, 2 security guards killed when car was set on fire.
Angry mine workers demonstrated for more pay, hit cars with sticks and pipes. Body of man bludgeoned to death found nearby. Journalists attacked also.
Worker injured in strike violence was dragged from hospital bed by police, beaten and killed.
Striking miners armed with machetes and iron bars battled with police, who responded by shooting dead 34 miners.
More than 150 arrested miners have claimed that they were beaten in police custody to coerce them to implicate colleagues in police killings.
Mine workers gather at scene of mine massacre, Malema makes speech calling for Zuma to resign.
Striking workers gathered outside of mine, names of those arrested in crackdown read. Workers refused to return to work while mourning 34 killed in crackdown.
Mine workers gathered under police guard in defiance of Lonmin to protest issues raised during strike.
Angry miners held up plastic bags of bullet casings to defense minister who had come to apologize for earlier mine massacre by police.
Mine workers went on strike to demand higher wages.
Families of striking miners who were arrested demonstrated outside court to demand their release.
Striking miners and citizens gathered to dance, sing, and repeat demands for higher wages.
Miners went on strike over disagreements within National Union of Mineworkers.
Miners fired for earlier strike attacked colleages to block them from working, police fired rubber bullets and tear gas.
Striking miners marched at mine to demand that collegaues stay away from work.
Striking miners carrying sticks marched from Marikana to Karee mine, both owned by Lonmin, threatened to kill workers unless they joined strike.
Gold miners went on strike to demand removal of shop stewards and minumum monthly wage, security guards fired tear gas on one occasion.
Striker lashed a whip at a man reporting for work, man was chased by men waving clubs and machetes.
Striking miners held a protest against Gold Fields International
Body of murdered man was found  with deep gashes to back of the neck near area where strikers normally gather.
Thousands of miners marched to hospital to see injured miners allegedly beaten and tortured by police, who blocked access to hospital.
Miners went on strike to demand greater monthly take-home pay, workers blocked roads to mine with tires, tree trunks & marched on mine shaft.
Striking miners, some carrying traditional weapons, gathered in stadium for rally regarding strike issues.
Some miners stopped work Friday to demand a minimum take-home pay.
Officers used stun grenades to disperse demonstrators at mine.
Police fired stun grenades to disperse striking miners demonstrating outside of mine.
Police raided hostels at the Lonmin PLC mine, fired rubber bullets and tear gas to force people into their homes. Masutlhe later died of injuries sustained during raid.
Miners took part in peaceful march towards police station, police persuaded miners to halt march.
Striking miners gathered at a stadium as part of strike to hear politician Julius Malema speak.
Workers engaged in an illegal strike, police arrest 42 in response.
Mine workers lit bonfires of leaflets that explained wage offer from Lonmin PLC in a stadium.
Striking miners threw stones, blocked roads during march were asked to lay down weapons by police. Upon refusal, police used tear gas, rubber bullets, stun grenades to disperse crowd.
Mine workers demonstrated to demand that police leave town after deal was reached to end strike.
Mine workers went on strike to demand a pay raise.
Miners went on strike over wage-related issues.
Road freight employees went on strike to demand a pay increase.
Striking truck drivers gathered and threw stones at passing trucks.
Workers engaged in legal strike.
Miners engaged in strike over pay demands.
Striking workers marched in Durban over strike issues.
Employees failed to report for duty amidst widespread strikes in mining industry.
Employees embarked on an illegal sit-in underground over wage-related demands.
NUM chairperson was seriously injured when his home was petrol-bombed, attack on another branch leader led to his wife being killed.
Mining contractors downed tools at coal mining firm.
Two workers at Impala Platinum mine and three others were killed amid labour violence and strikes.
Mine workers went on an illegal strike.
Truck traveling on highway was pelted with stones, causing it to overturn. Two other trucks were set on fire.
Striking truck drivers demonstrated over demands for a 12 percent pay raise in major cities across the country.
Striking workers gathered on a hill near mine and kept a vigil there.
Several thousand workers went on strike at Harmony One.
Toyota workers went on strike over a wage dispute.
Striking miners marched to AngloGold Ashanti offices to demand higher wages.
Police used tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse miners armed with sticks and crude weapons burning tires and vehicles, one miner killed by rubber bullets.
300 workers engaged in a strike, occupied a mine dump over wage demands.
Gunmen shot and killed cousin of NUM shop steward in case of mistaken identity, steward was the target.
Striking miners gathered to protest their dismissal and to mourn colleague killed in clash with police.
Union official was shot and killed at his home, may have been killed due to being a witness into inquiry regarding earlier strike-related deaths.
Striking miners blocked entry into Anglo American's only working mine shaft, trapping 800 people underground.
Stewart was killed after being struck in the head with stone thrown by strikers.
Miners attempted to stop mine operations, set taxis on fire and burned a person alive. Police responded by firing rubber bullets, one killed from rubber bullet wounds.
Striking miners occupied a mine dump and seized heavy equipment, threatening to destroy it if pay demands are not met. Police arrested 40 workers on Oct. 16.
Miners marched on mine shaft, police used tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse crowd. Miners retaliated with petrol bombs, burned police vehicle.
Striking miners hurled rocks at motorcade of Vavi during visit to mine.
Bus drivers of a leading bus company went on strike after talks over wages stalled between employer, workers, and local municipality.
Dlamini was gunned down outside of a courthouse during trial of another IFP politician.
Police arrested 26 workers in clashes at mine.
Striking workers stopped other miners from returning to work by pelting buses with stones, several injured.
Workers at Toyota Bosoku went on strike to demand a one-time bonus.
Mine workers at coal facility went on strike.
Mine workers staged a strike
AngloGold employees gathered to march and sing to demonstrate resolve during strike.
Striking Amplats miners armed with sticks and stones gathered to block rally by COSATU, threatened to attack its members. Police fired rubber bullets at miners.
COSATU members gathered near mine during Anglo American mine strike, rally blocked by armed Amplats strikers.
Miners barricaded roads, blocked fire engines, threw stones, set Amplats power station on fire. Police responded with arrests, rubber bullets, tear gas, and stun grenades. Meanwhile 3000 miners gathered at a sports ground nearby.
Two striking miners were shot dead by security guards as they attempted to break into mine armoury.
Workers staged a sit-in over pay at two AngloGold mines.
Workers staged a sit-in over pay at two AngloGold mines.
Farmers in vineyard region went on strike to demand higher wages.
Farmers clashed with police sporadically, vineyards set on fire, and state highway closed as result of actions over wage demands. Police made arrests.
Demonstrators burned tires and blocked roads to protest government demolition of houses built on plots sold illegally.
Two Zambian soccer players were hurt when team bus was stoned by two youths following match. Youths were taken into police custody.
Mine workers threw stones at cars and burned tires, police made arrests.
Farm workers set fire to farms/vehicles/stores, overturned police truck, and confronted police over wage issues. Police fired tear gas, two killed as result of police action.
Police arrested miners who had stoned police cars in front of court where hearing was taking place for miners arrested in demonstrations.
Clashes broke out between NUM and AMCU members at Harmony Gold mine, one shot dead and another hacked to death.
Congolese immigrants demonstrated against President Kabila outside United Nations offices after rebels seized towns in DRC.
Farm workers went on strike to demand wage increases.
Farm workers marched to AgriWes-Cape offices to hand over memorandum of wage demands.
Farm workers threw stones at trucks during strike action, police fired rubber bullets and made arrests in another location.
Farm workers threw stones at trucks during strike action, police fired rubber bullets and made arrests in another location.
Members of ANC Women's League marched to High Commission to pressure UK to extradite Shrien Dewani (murder suspect) to S.A.
Miners and contractors went on strike at Harmony Gold.
Mine workers demonstrated over the suspension of workers who had gone on strike, police & security guards fired tear gas and rubber bullets.
Miners engaged in a sit-in, refused to come to the surface for unexplained reasons.
Prisoners rioted and took over a prison in Central South Africa. The riots began over the quality of food within the prisons
Farmers protesting for higher wages switched to rioting when police began using repression
Miners at the Anglo American Platinum Mine went on strike in protest of proposed job cuts
Prison gangs started a prison wide brawl which led to the death of two prisoners
Citizens rioted over proposed changes to municipal boundaries, which is assumed to impact city benefits
Students protested over an increase in fees
New Mineworkers union attacked the NUM. The AMCU considers the NUM to be too close to the companies
Miners on strike as company has not paid a promised bonus
New Mineworkers union protested in seeking recognition
A leader of AMCU was gunned down before he could testify. Part of growing tension between the two mining unions
AMCU on strike until NUM is held accountable for the death of the AMCU leader
AMCU workers shot dead a NUM leader and wounded the union's treasurer
NUM protests the firing of its members from the Implats mine
AMCU started a sit in protest over the firing of four of its leaders
protesters demonstrated against Obama's visit
AMCU went on strike after the firing of four of its leaders
Miners went on strike during the annual wage negotiations
Man shot dead as part of inter-union rivalry
NUM leader was gunned down
AMCU protested over the firing of close to 7,000 workers
NUMSA went on strike seeking a pay increase
NUM went on strike calling for greater wage increase
Families protest the lack of funding for relatives of slain mine workers
Brewery Workers go on strike demanding wage increase
NUM leader was gunned down
Local vigilantes attacked local gangsters after hundreds of men met to discuss crime
NUM leader was gunned down
AMCU staged a sit in for better wages
Unemployed South Africans have rioted in their demands for jobs
A former intelligence chief who fell out of favor with Kagame is found murdered in his hotel room; some accuse Kagame of ordering the assassination.
Around 50 people protest Rwandan President Kagame, blaming him for ordering an assassination against a former intelligence chief.
Supporters of Malema are attacked by locals when they arrive to handover a house to an impoverished neighbor of Zuma.
Residents protest over lack access to water for over a week; four protesters are killed.
Residents protest over lack access to water for over a week; four protesters are killed.
Residents of an informal settlement protest and riot against police when they think they'll be evicted.
80,000 Miners strike, calling for more than double the pay for entry-level jobs; on Feb. 5, miners begin getting violent in their protests; on Feb. 21 a member is set on fire and attacked with a machete
220 employees strike demanding a pay increase.
An angry mob burns the homes of two murder suspects, police kill a 15 year-old boy; three days later 2000 people attack a police station and two protesters are killed.
Two men attack and attempt to murder a non-striking mineworker.
Residents burn tires and throw stones at passing vehicles to protest against lack of water and sanitation.
Postal workers strike, demanding more benefits
ANC supporters attack DA marchers and are repelled by police.
People riot over an assault that killed a 10 year old; people trying to leave shoot at protesters.
A group of armed men attempt an assassination against a former Rwandan general.
Police are filmed beating an unarmed man.
Thousands strike and march to demand better policies to fight poverty and unemployment, particularly for youth.
Residents protest and riot over lack of public services, they light the mayor's house and a police car on fire. Violence spread and a shopkeeper shoots and kills a protesting teenager.
Residents protest and riot over lack of public services, they light the mayor's house and a police car on fire. Violence spread and a shopkeeper shoots and kills a protesting teenager.
Supporters of the ruling ANC party stone busses carrying supporters of the DA.
Supporters of the ruling ANC party stone busses carrying supporters of the DA.
People protest and burn tires, blocking roads, to call for better government services.
People protest and burn tires, blocking roads, to call for better government services.
protesters throw rocks and set fire to a polling station.
An ANC campaign staff member is killed by an unidentified opposition party member.
protesters riot, burning tires and barricading streets, after arrests of rioters previous day alleging vote rigging.
NUM workers are killed and some attacked with knives on their way to work or in their homes.
Around 60 people set fire to shops and march for better wages.
Striking miners march near the Lonmin mine.
A miner who resisted participating in strikes is murdered on his way to work.
5,500 sugar workers down tools, demanding higher wages.
200,000 NUMSA union members strike and march for pay increases.
Workers outfits.
An AMCU leader is murdered after being implicated in murders of policemen and security guards during strikes in 2012.
Soap actors walk off set, demanding better pay and royalties. They are fired.
EFF members protest the president's use of taxpayer money for $24 million home security updates.
A handful of protesters oppose the opening of a mosque that is friendly to homosexuals, Christians and gender equality.
A gay-friendly mosque is damaged in an arson attack.
Demonstrators call on the government to do more to stop illegal trade in rhinos and elephants.
Six men are found executed.
Rival gangs clashed around Johannesburg, killing about 20 people.
A week of looting that targeted foreign-owned shops began after a shop owner in Soweto shot a young man trying to rob his store; nearly 200 were arrested and 6 were killed over the course of the week.
A week of looting that targeted foreign-owned shops began after a shop owner in Soweto shot a young man trying to rob his store; nearly 200 were arrested and 6 were killed over the course of the week.
A week of looting that targeted foreign-owned shops began after a shop owner in Soweto shot a young man trying to rob his store; nearly 200 were arrested and 6 were killed over the course of the week.
Hundreds attended a Democratic Alliance (DA) party rally outside parliament, where party leaders told supporters they would continue to pursue corruption and money-laundering charges against President Zuma.
Opposition lawmakers stood up in parliament to protest President Zuma's corruption while he gave speech on the state of the nation, and were removed by security guards; Democratic Alliance (DA) members subsequently walked out.
A foreign shopkeeper was badly burned in a petrol bomb attack; nine people were subequently arrested and charged with public violence and attempted murder.
A series of statue vandalizations took place across the country after students at the University of Cape Town threw excrement on a statue of Cecil John Rhodes and held protests to demand its removal; statues of other figures considered to be symbols of colonialism were also defaced.
A series of statue vandalizations took place across the country after students at the University of Cape Town threw excrement on a statue of Cecil John Rhodes and held protests to demand its removal; statues of other figures considered to be symbols of colonialism were also defaced.
A series of statue vandalizations took place across the country after students at the University of Cape Town threw excrement on a statue of Cecil John Rhodes and held protests to demand its removal; statues of other figures considered to be symbols of colonialism were also defaced.
A series of statue vandalizations took place across the country after students at the University of Cape Town threw excrement on a statue of Cecil John Rhodes and held protests to demand its removal; statues of other figures considered to be symbols of colonialism were also defaced.
A series of statue vandalizations took place across the country after students at the University of Cape Town threw excrement on a statue of Cecil John Rhodes and held protests to demand its removal; statues of other figures considered to be symbols of colonialism were also defaced.
A series of statue vandalizations took place across the country after students at the University of Cape Town threw excrement on a statue of Cecil John Rhodes and held protests to demand its removal; statues of other figures considered to be symbols of colonialism were also defaced.
A Zimbabwean woman was burnt alive by a lynch mob after being wrongly accused of killing a young boy; a crowd later attacked the police station where three people arrested in the incident were being held.
An author was attacked by 4 assailants and hit with a brick after voicing her admiration for Salman Rushdie at a book signing.
More than 3000 workers went on strike at the construction site of the Medupi power plant to demand bonuses and end layoffs; more than 1000 workers were fired a day later.
Attacks and looting of foreign-owned shops took place in several cities in several weeks of anti-immigrant violence, in which at least 7 were killed and thousands of immigrants were displaced or returned to their home countries; the government deployed the army to combat gangs and people targeting foreigners.
Attacks and looting of foreign-owned shops took place in several cities in several weeks of anti-immigrant violence, in which at least 7 were killed and thousands of immigrants were displaced or returned to their home countries; the government deployed the army to combat gangs and people targeting foreigners.
Attacks and looting of foreign-owned shops took place in several cities in several weeks of anti-immigrant violence, in which at least 7 were killed and thousands of immigrants were displaced or returned to their home countries; the government deployed the army to combat gangs and people targeting foreigners.
Hundreds held a candlelight vigil, and several thousand demonstrators marched in Johannesburg two days later, to protest recent attacks against immigrants.
Hundreds of municipal workers marched through the center of Cape Town to demand better wages and benefits.
protesters blocked a road and burned tires in Soweto to protest the state power company's shift to a prepaid meter system; police fired rubber bullets.
A rally was held in an immigrant neighborhood in Johannesburg to protest a recent police operation that led to the arrest and deportation of hundreds of immigrants.
A nationwide police operation led to the arrest and deportation of hundreds of illegal immigrants, as well as the arrest of thousands of South Africans following weeks of anti-immigrant violence in April.
Taxi drivers protested outside Uber's offices in Johannesburg to oppose unfair competition from Uber drivers.
Five people died in inter-gang violence in Springs as gangs fought for of the Grootvlei mine.
Students at the University of KwaZulu-Natal protested changes to financial aid; the protests turned violent as some students vandalized the university and burned cars.
Two people were killed and thirty-four were injured in a Molotov cocktail attack on a bus at the Strand resort.
Students at Vaal University protested and refused to attend class due to the lack of security: two students were murdered at the university weeks before.
Around 2000 people in both Cape Town and Pretoria marched to protest corruption in the central government, particularly President Zuma's misspending.
Around 2000 people in both Cape Town and Pretoria marched to protest corruption in the central government, particularly President Zuma's misspending.
Conservationists protested in Johannesburg to call for an end to poaching and a stronger governmental focus on protecting wildlife.
The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) declared an indefinite strike to demand wage increases.
Several thousand people marched in Johannesburg in a demonstration against government corruption and the state of the economy; the march was organized by the National Union of Metal Workers of South Africa (NUMSA).
Thousands of students demonstrated at universities throughout the country, as well as outside the government building in Pretoria, to oppose university tuition increases; President Zuma announced he would cancel the increases.
South Africa's ruling party hosted a rally to mark the visit of Hamas leader Khaled Meshaal and colleagues.
Parliamentary workers went on strike to demand better pay and working conditions; they disrupted parliamentary meetings twice in two weeks, and police fired stun and smoke grenades.
Namibia's official opposition party said Tuesday it would seek a court interdict to postpone regional and local elections in the northern Owambo region, after reports that one of its members had been brutally murdered.
In August, police in the ethnically tense Caprivi strip in the Namibian panhandle used tear gas to quell rioting after members of the Mafwe tribe tried to stop the Mayeyi from installing their first ever chief.
A two-week strike by 3,500 workers at Namibia's Consolidated Diamond Mines (CDM) ended Monday after management and the mine workers' union settled their wage dispute, the company said.
There was a brief moment of tension as President Sam Nujoma drove into town in a motorcade on his way to the Civic Centre, where he was greeted by a crowd of about 200 chanting women and schoolchildren.
UNITA rebels attack a Namibian town, leaving 3 dead.
Leaders and elders of the Herero tribe protested Friday against the visit of German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, saying Germany should pay compensation for a turn-of-the century slaughter of Hereros.
Former guerrilla fighters who held a government official hostage this week will be absorbed into the military and police, the government said Wednesday.
Some 1,300 copper miners have gone on strike in Namibia over a pay claim and brought production in three mines to a total halt on Friday, an industry official said.
Some 1,300 copper miners have gone on strike in Namibia over a pay claim and brought production in three mines to a total halt on Friday, an industry official said.
Some 1,300 copper miners have gone on strike in Namibia over a pay claim and brought production in three mines to a total halt on Friday, an industry official said.
US pop idol Michael Jackson swept into Namibia to a tumultous welcome Sunday that took police by surprise and forced the cancellation of his plans to go walkabout in a shopping mall and a street market.
During a brief court appearance in the coastal town of Swakopmund, Thomas Florin, 36, pleaded not guilty to the charge of murder, before being bundled out of the back of the court to avoid the ire of some 1,000 protesters who had gathered at th
Secessionist unrest worsened at the end of October, and Mishake Muyongo, an opposition leader, had to flee to Botswana with several dozen supporters. He was joined by his first cousin, King Mamili, who is leader of the Mafwe tribe, the dominant
Speaking to a crowd of 10,000 at Windhoek's Independence Stadium, Nujoma said all those who followed failed and disgruntled politicians to Botswana should come back to their country.
Namibia Alleged secessionists try to seize control of this small town on the northeastern edge of Namibia's remote Caprivi Strip. At least 16 people are killed in the fighting.
About 1,500 civil servants, students and ruling party SWAPO members on Wednesday marched on Gov. Bernard Sibalatani's office to hand over a petition, demanding that bail be denied to the 97 men accused of trying to bring about the secession of
About 800 supporters including whites, blacks and people of mixed race turned out for the gathering at a stadium in Windhoek. Most had to be taught the party's campaign slogan, ''COD a new beginning,'' as a party leader led the chant.
UNITA rebels attack military locations approved for use against UNITA.
UNITA rebels attack civilians and government stations inside Namibia.
Gunmen attacked a group of French tourists, killing at least three children and seriously wounding their parents, as they traveled through a border region where Angola's civil war has spilled over in recent months, officials said Tuesday.
On Wednesday, the Namibian community of Gciruku, an area about 120 kilometers (74 miles) east of the main border town of Rundu, led a peaceful demonstration to their local tribal offices and demanded urgent action against cross-border UNITA rai
War veterans dumped their artificial limbs on a street leading to Windhoek after police prevented them from entering the city to demand government compensation for injuries sustained in Namibia's liberation war, a newspaper reported Friday.
UNITA rebels attack a police station in Western Caprivi.
Nine villagers from northeast Namibia have been abducted and tortured, three of them to death, by a group of UNITA soldiers, a human rights group said Sunday.
UNITA rebels attack soldiers.
A Malaysian textile factory in Namibia quarantined about 100 Chinese workers for 10 days to guard against any outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), The Namibian daily reported Thursday.
Hundreds of people protested a visit Wednesday by Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe, holding signs reading, Go home dictator. Police cordoned off the Zimbabwean Embassy, where demonstrators gathered. The local National Society for Human Right
Namibia's mineworkers union threatened on Tuesday to launch nationwide industrial action in solidarity with striking workers at the country's largest zinc mine following a deadlock in wage negotiations.
Women stage a sit-in after three women with HIV claim they were sterilized without their consent.
Taxi drivers pelt police with rocks in a protest against increased traffic fines.
Hundreds of Namibians protest against Germany due to its role in the Herero genocide in the early 20th century.
Children of fallen independence fighters protest outside the ruling parties headquarters calling for jobs. Clashes with police erupt leaving one woman dead.
The coup may have been prompted by the government budget announced last month, which gave substantial pay raises to members of the military council, but just minor increases to army officers and other ranks. Parts of the army reportedly were on
An army officer was installed as Lesotho's new ruler Wednesday and his ousted predecessor packed his bags and headed home to the farm.
One man was shot dead and several others injured here Wednesday in clashes with police during a mob rampage, sparked by the alleged murder of a woman in a shop, the South African Press Association (SAPA) reported.
One man was shot dead and several others injured here Wednesday in clashes with police during a mob rampage, sparked by the alleged murder of a woman in a shop, the South African Press Association (SAPA) reported.
One man was shot dead and several others injured here Wednesday in clashes with police during a mob rampage, sparked by the alleged murder of a woman in a shop, the South African Press Association (SAPA) reported.
One man was shot dead and several others injured here Wednesday in clashes with police during a mob rampage, sparked by the alleged murder of a woman in a shop, the South African Press Association (SAPA) reported.
the military ruler of Lesotho Colonel Elias Ramaema, the South African news agency SAPA reported. Eighteen officers are under arrest. (AFP)
APLA and white South African farmers engage in battle in southern Lesotho.
Heavy fighting between rival bands of soldiers erupted in the capital early Sunday after several days of skirmishes on the outskirts.
Rebel soldiers apparently angry over a lingering pay dispute shot and killed Lesotho's deputy prime minister on Thursday, South African diplomats said. Four other Cabinet ministers taken hostage by the soldiers were released.
An army revolt in January 1994 was followed in June of that year by a lengthy police labor strike.
Angry that the king dissolved the elected government, thousands of people protested Wednesday in front of the royal palace in Lesotho. Troops fired at the crowd and four people were reportedly killed.
Angry that the king dissolved the elected government, thousands of people protested Wednesday in front of the royal palace in Lesotho. Troops fired at the crowd and four people were reportedly killed.
Letsie was also facing mounting pressure at home. Lesotho businesses Tuesday observed the second day of a general strike to protest against the government's dissolution. Shops were closed and school children stayed away from classes.
Taxi horns and hawkers' calls returned to this fraying capital at the end of a two-day strike to pressure the king to restore the elected government he ousted last month.
Jubilant crowds danced and sang in the streets of the Lesotho capital Wednesday after King Letsie III restored to power the elected government he threw out in a coup last month.
King Moshoeshoe II, dethroned five years ago by Lesotho's former military regime, was reinstated on Wednesday before a crowd of several thousand in the capital of his mountain kingdom.
Members of the national soccer team were back at practice Tuesday after staging a strike over pay.
The police action began Monday to demand a pay increase along with other civil servants in this mountain kingdom surrounded by South Africa.
Policemen shot dead two people when they opened fire on a crowd of looters who broke into shops in central Maseru overnight to profit from a go-slow strike by Lesotho security forces, police said Tuesday.
The signing was greeted with protests in the Lesotho capital Maseru, where, according to the national news agency SAPA, minibus taxi drivers clogged the streets at peak hour traffic.
Several thousand demonstrators marched down Maseru's main road Thursday to protest legislation aimed at preventing public servants from joining unions.
The radio broadcast followed a rally at a stadium here in the morning by the opposition Basotho National Party (BNP) and tribal chiefs, after which a large crowd of opposition supporters marched on parliament.
At least three people were shot dead and more than 10 others were injured Saturday in a clash between police and sacked workers at a national water project site near this northern Lesotho town, hospital sources told AFP.
At least five patients at a government hospital in the capital of the mountain kingdom of Lesotho have died during a three-day national nurses' strike, hospital sources said Wednesday.
Crack South African police units specialising in hostage situations are on standby to possibly help end a four-day police mutiny in the capital of neighbouring Lesotho, press reports said Sunday.
Youthful Lesotho opposition political leaders on Thursday held a street protest calling for the resignation of Prime Minister Ntsu Mokhehle, who shocked observers by forming a new governing party last week.
South African and Lesotho police and government officials were to meet Tuesday to discuss recurrent incidents of sheep rustling near their border, the latest leaving 11 dead last week.
Police opened fire on rioting women workers at a textile plant on Friday, killing one and injuring more than 40 others.
Thousands of opposition party supporters streamed through Lesotho's capital on Sunday to protest election results that appeared to be handing a sweep of parliamentary seats to the ruling party.
Around 2,000 opposition supporters marched Tuesday on the offices of Lesotho's independent electoral commission to demand a re-run of Saturday's elections, after the ruling party's runaway win.
Lesotho police arrested 33 youths, apparently members of the opposition Basotho National Party (BNP), in the early hours of Thursday just days after general elections in the mountain kingdom.
Police fired rubber bullets and used water cannons Wednesday to drive away several hundred protesters outside Lesotho's Parliament.
Unrest in Lesotho started after a May 23 election, which the opposition claims was rigged in favour of the LCD, and culminated in September with a general strike and a mutiny in the army. Violence followed foreign intervention at the behest of
Lesotho police and soldiers opened automatic gunfire at each other outside the palace of King Letsie III early Thursday evening, killing one civilian, an AFP correspondent at the scene saw.
A young supporter of one of the political parties opposed to Lesotho's government was critically wounded Sunday after being shot in the neck at close range by a policeman, eyewitnesses said.
Dozens of mutinous soldiers were holed up in military headquarters Friday, surrounded by troops loyal to the government of this small southern African kingdom, a U.S. diplomat said.
South African Defence Minister Joe Modise Monday resumed negotiations here with rival army factions, as hundreds of angry protesters demanded he stop interfering in the affairs of the mountain kingdom.
Anti-government protesters caused renewed unrest in Lesotho's capital on Tuesday when they forced civil servants out of their cars and seized about 50 state vehicles, an AFP correspondent said.
Protests flared in Lesotho's streets Wednesday over a disputed May election, even as officials announced that a three-nation investigation into allegations of vote fraud had concluded.
1998 Lesotho Government
outh African press reports Thursday, quoting villagers who have fled across the border, said the bandits, driving around in trucks and pickups, enter villages with a list of names of supporters of the Lesotho Congress for Democracy (LCD), the p
Along with a rally Sunday by the opposition alliance, the ruling party gathering fueled ongoing tensions in Lesotho.
Premier Pakalitha Mosisili fled to safety Sunday after a gunshot injured a participant at a party rally.
Two Lesotho opposition activists were killed and a third was injured on Sunday in an attack in a village east of Maseru, police said.
Amnesty International expressed concern Thursday over conditions in a Lesotho prison where 50 soldiers accused of staging a mutiny last year are being held. The prisoners on Monday briefly overran the prison in the capital Maseru to protest the
But the home team, who staged a brief, midweek strike demanding 3,000 dollars appearance money each, had to play without injured star striker Lebajoa Mphongoa, and that was just the start of their troubles.
The government of Lesotho closed down the southern African country's only teachers training college Friday, eight days after the 1,500 students initiated a strike.
Police in Lesotho used tear gas and clubs Monday to break up a protest by clothing workers demanding better wages and working conditions.
Eight people were killed in weekend violence triggered by cattle rustling in Lesotho, police said Monday amid reports that villagers are increasingly taking the law into their own hands.
Lesotho police have fired rubber bullets and teargas at students who were demonstrating against delays in the allocation of allowances at the tiny mountain kingdom's only university outside Maseru, an official said Friday.
One protester was killed Monday and five others were critically wounded after police opened fire Monday on a group of workers demanding higher wages, according to news reports.
Lesotho's foreign minister was injured in a weekend shooting outside his home, police said Monday, raising fears of political violence in the tiny mountain kingdom.
A Dutch aid worker with the Clinton Foundation was shot to death at the house of Lesotho's trade and industry minister, police said Saturday.
An indefinite curfew has been imposed in Lesotho's capital Maseru following a series of attacks by gunmen targeting senior political figures and their bodyguards, police said on Tuesday.
Lesotho's capital Maseru was brought to a standstill on Tuesday as thousands of workers heeded a stay-away call by the opposition as part of long-running dispute over election results.
Lesotho's main opposition leader Tom Thabane on Sunday called on Prime Minister Pakalitha Mosisili to hold snap elections to solve a 20-month dispute over parliamentary seats.
An assassination attempt is directed on the Prime Minister, uncovering political tensions existing after an election in which the opposition disputes the allocation of Parliament seats
Thousands of supporters of the All Basotho Convention held a rally in Maseru ahead of national elections, hoping to mount a successful challenge to the Prime Minister Pakalitha Mosisili and his Democratic Congress party.
In Maseru, thousands of members of the Lesotho Congress for Democracy rallied to express support for their party in upcoming elections and to show opposition to PM Mosili and the ruling Democratic Congress.
Thousands of members of the Democratic Congress rallied in Maseru to support the reelection of Pakalitha Mosisili.
The military raids police headquarters and installations, disarming police, and looks for national leadership in an apparent coup attempt.
Supporters of a lieutenant responsible for a coup attempt to assassinate his replacement.
Police and soldiers fire at each other after soldiers get close to the home of the police commander
Soldiers attack the home of a senior government official, leading to a shootout with police.
A shootout between "rogue" soldiers  and the President's armed body guards ensued in the capital, the reason is unknown though tensions remain high after the failed 2014 coup. The shootout killed a bystander and injured two body guards, the government claims the military fired first, the military refutes this claims. 
Former army chief is shot and killed by a reported group of soldiers while he was surrendering himself to authorities for his roles in an attempted coup last year. Others report that he resisted arrest. Mahoe was aligned with former Primer Minister who fled the country earlier in the year. 
Diamond miners go on strike
Public sector workers strike over pay
Students protest firing of government employees
Villagers riot after ritual killing of a girl, protest police inefficiency.  Protest spreads to capital
Villagers riot after ritual killing of a girl, protest police inefficiency.  Protest spreads to capital
Hyundai workers strike after plan to close down plant announced
University faculty strike over pay
Local government service providers strike over pay
Protest against U.S. war in Iraq
Diamond miners go on strike over pay
San Bushment protest against government relocation plan.
Union activists protest against decision to fire leader
Opposition party protests against relocation of San Bushmen
Group urges government and SADC to take stronger stance on Zimbabwe rights violations
Zimbabwean immigrants protest against Mugabe government
90,000 civil servants strike over pay increases.  Thousands march in the streets.  Students angry over their teacher's participation in the strike riot, and police respond with tear gas.
The Botswana national football team began a two day strike after national football association officials  failed to meet the team's financial demands
Students riot over quality of campus life and food.
Students stage two day boycott over disciplining of student leaders accused of organizing protests.
Anti-government activists bomb the homes of two government officials.
Workers strike demanding worker's right legislation and greater political openness.
Workers strike demanding worker's right legislation and greater political openness.
Swaziland University lecturers hold two day strike demanding better pay and working conditions
Street vendors protest government clamp down on unlicensed street vendors and nepotism in issuing licenses.
Street vendors protest government clamp down on unlicensed street vendors and nepotism in issuing licenses.
Anti-royalists, organized by Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions and Swaziland Youth Congress, protest demanding multi-party democracy be restored.
Anti-royalists, organized by Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions and Swaziland Youth Congress, protest demanding multi-party democracy be restored.
Supporters of the Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions demonstrate when leaders are released from prison.
SFTU members rally to demand political reform.
Members of SFTU rally to protest threatened legal action against labor leaders.
SDA supporters protest monarchy.
Teachers, civil servants and students strike demanding wage increases.
Pro-democracy supporters demonstrate calling on government to institute democratic reforms.
SFTU members hold nationwide stirke demanding political reform.
SYC organized protest demanding political reform.
Teachers strike to demand increased wages.
Members of SFTU stage a stay-away campaign to urge democratic reform.
Protesters block King Mswati's exit form the airport demanding political reforms.
Protesters demonstrate outside polling stations demanding greater democracy.
Bombing of a bridge after the King had crossed.
Bombing near army headquarters.
Bombing of government offices.
Nurse strike demanding the government recognize the Swaziland Nurses Association as a professional union.
Bombing of government community center.
Workers strike against the Industrial Relations Act, claiming it is restrictive.
Demonstrations throughout Swaziland against the King's decision to forcable remove over 200 people from their homes to provide land for the King's brother.
Teachers strike against King's decision to evict over 200 people from their homes to provide land for the King's brother.
Teachers strike against King's decision to evict over 200 people from their homes to provide land for the King's brother.
Political activists attempt to march to the office of the Prime Minister to demand political reform.
Protesters demonstrate to demand political reform.
Protesters demonstrate to demand political reform.
Trade unionist demonstrate on the border in an attempt to cause economic distress to Swaziland and force political change.
Bombing of Mbabane National Court.  Actor and issue remain unknown.
Bombing of army officers tent.  Actor and cause remain unknown.
Protest demanding political change.
Protesters demonstrate outside High Court building demanding democratic reforms, the day Masuku, leader of PUDEMO, is cleared of charges of sedition.
Protesters march on the Prime Minister's office demanding political reform.
Lawyers strike over the government's decision to ignore court ruling that prevents the King from overriding parliamentary decisions.
Democratic organizations call for general strike and protests against purchase of a jet for the King, interference with the judicial system and demanding political reform.
Democratic organizations call for general strike and protests against purchase of a jet for the King, interference with the judicial system and demanding political reform.
Two bombings of police compound.
Workers strike demanding political reform.
Workers strike demanding political reform.
Demonstrators protest the 30 year ban on party politics.
Public sector workers protest demanding pay increases to match those given to politicians.
Pro-democracy demonstration outside a meeting of the British Commonwealth representatives, some demonstrators damaged store fronts.
Swaziland Nurses Association calls for strike demanding government pay overtime arrears dating back as far as 2001.
Swaziland Nurses Association calls for strike demanding government pay overtime arrears dating back as far as 2001.
Soccer fans attack Swaziland team for losing the Cosafa Castle Cup.
Protesters march intending to march to Mbabane to demand the end of the monarchy are met with police force.
Workers march through capital in protest of taxation on retirement benefits and poor constitutional reform.
Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions called for two-day strike to protest non-inclusion in the constitutional reform hearings.
Church groups protest the new draft of the consitution saying it gives the King too much power.
Campaign of 11 firebomb attacks over three months.
Two firebomb attacks on schools.
Trade unionist blockaded border posts with South Africa to demand political reform.
Workers strike to demand multi-party elections.
Workers strike to demand multi-party elections.
Textile workers strike demanding pay increases.
Women protest against shopping spress carried out by the royal family and demanding multi-party democracy.
Pro-democracy supporters march to demand multi-party elections and protest government spending.
Pro-democracy supporters march to demand multi-party elections and protest government spending.
Pro-democracy supporters blockade border with South Africa in protest of non-multi-party elections.
students during the march - and arrest a leader taking pictures and found to possess a union membership card.
Demonstrators march to demand multi-party democracy.  Several arrests are made.
Students protest government plans to cut living stipends for those on scholarship programs.
Nurses strike over back-wages.
7000 protesters march to decry a planned freeze of civil service salaries; pro-democracy activists join in the protest to push their cause.
Thousands organize to demand democratic reforms on the anniversary of the King's banning of all political parties.  Police use water cannons and tear gas.
Teachers and civil servants march to deliver petitions to the US and South African embassies calling for those countries to push for democratic reforms in Swaziland.
Several union marches occur around the country protesting the failing economy, while activists demand that the government not cut drug supplies for AIDS victims.
Lawyers strike to call for the removal of the chief justice.
Students protest the closure of their university.
Protesters march to demand democracy.1
School principals protest to decry the impact on education of the country's budget crisis.
Lawyers march to demand the sacking of the chief justice.
Students protest to demand that the government pay overdue meal allowances.
University students protested their school's failure to open for semester, clashed with students from teacher's college who refused to join protest. Police fired teargas and made arrests.
Students demonstrated to demand democracy and scholarships for university students.
Union leaders were arrested as they gathered for anti-monarchy demonstrations that regime had banned. Few protesters participated in planned event.
Union leader was addressing demonstrating teachers demanding pay raise, violence broke out when police attempted to stop union leader speech.
Teachers demonstrated over pay, joined by some students. Police responded by assaulting students, using tear gas. 9-yr old hit with rubber bullet.
Teachers went on strike to demand 4.5% salary increase, defying court ruling. Initially reported as teacher's strike, later involved broader set of public service workers. Nurses abandoned strike in favor of work slowdown on July 24. Over 300 teachers ignoring court order to end strike fired on Aug. 2. Teachers abandoned strike around Aug. 15.
Citizens demonstrated in support of striking teachers, police fired tear gas and beat protesters. Demonstrators responded by throwing rocks at police.
Government workers demonstrated to demand higher wages. Police, who claim protesters lacked permit, responded with rubber bullets, tear gas, and beatings.
Taxi drivers staged a strike, issue unclear.
Teachers demonstrated in the streets in two towns over salary increase in connection with ongoing strike.
Teachers demonstrated in the streets in two towns over salary increase in connection with ongoing strike.
After court verdict reinstating striking teachers who were fired, teachers marched to education ministry to deliver petition to halt firings.
Banned organizations called for citizens to boycott election/registration in protest of King Mswati's rule. Registration was less than 10% of previous polls.
SWAYOCO members protest the trial of journalists for criticizing the government.
Dissidents seize the national radio station.  Government troops storm the station and arrest the dissidents.  A large crowd gathers outside, which the govt. breaks up with tear gas.  3 people in the crowd die.
Almost six months of daily mass protests, demanding the drafting of a more democratic consititution.  Occurs alongside several strikes organized by the same.
Almost six months of daily mass protests, demanding the drafting of a more democratic consititution.  Occurs alongside several strikes organized by the same.
Almost six months of daily mass protests, demanding the drafting of a more democratic consititution.  Occurs alongside several strikes organized by the same.
Civil servants stage prologed strike against govt. of president Didier Ratsiraka.  Although the aims of this strike are the same as ongoing mass protests, it is organized by different parties.
Issue unknown.
Protests organized by the Lifeblood Committee erupt in Antsiranana and clash with govt. forces, who open fire, killing at least 2 (Amnesty International figure).  Riots ensue.
10 soldiers seize the state radio station and declare a coup, but then flee a couple hours later.
protesters take over several administrative buildings, demanding a federal system of government.  Soldiers storm the buildings, 2 die.
An air traffic controllers union strikes in West Africa and Madagascar, demanding higher salaries.
Strike by workers calling for higher pay.
About 1000 people hold a demonstration against a referendum over a more federal system of govt.  Police disperse with tear gas.
A crowd outside a UN organized concert riots when officials begin turning people away at the gates.
Hundreds of people including politicians and MPs demonstrate against the arrest of a senior MP.
Between 300 and 500 opposition supporters protest daily to demand the president's resignation.  Minor clashes ensue, police beat up several protesters and arrest several.
Supporters and opponents of the president clash ahead of an election.  2 die.
Supporters and opponents of the president clash ahead of an election.  2 die.
Daily mass protests in Antananarivo as supporters of the opposition presidential challenger demand that election results be released and that vote rigging be investigated.
Series of strikes called by opposition escalates to a general strike on 1/28/2002.  This event is coterminous with the protests and riots described in the previous event.
Supporters of president Ratsiraka and military factions blockade the capital city, which has been seized by opposition candidate and self-declared president Ravalomanana.
French expatriots demonstrate outside the French embassy to protest what they see as France's support of president Ratsiraka.
Activists of AREMA (president Didier Ratsiraka's party) organize a pro-govt. protest.
A pro-govt. attacker throws a grenade into a crowd of opposition supporters, wounding 10.
Opposition supporters march to the provincial governor's house to protest an attack on three of their colleagues.  Police open fire, killing 3.  Thousands gather the next day to commemorate the killings.
Protest in favor of Madagascar's self-proclaimed president Ravalomanana turns violent when troops open fire.  The protesters riot, burning down the houses of govt. loyalists.
Protest in favor of Madagascar's self-proclaimed president Ravalomanana turns violent when troops open fire.  The protesters riot, burning down the houses of govt. loyalists.
On 4/13, supporters of opposition president Marc Ravalomanana attack a group of soldiers, killing 5 in Fianarantsao.  On 4/16, supporters of opposition president Marc Ravalomanana clash with govt. forces in Fianarantsao.
Supporters of opposition president Marc Ravalomanana hold a rally.  Police repress with tear gas, injuring 52.
Supporters of rival politicians clash, wounding 5.
Soldiers storm the defense ministry to demand more pay.  Troops loyal to president Marc Ravalomanana fire into the air to disperse them.
Thousands of people demonstrate against Marc Ravalomanana's arrest of the previous president's prime minister.
Forces loyal to the new president (Marc Ravalomanana) try to sieze the airport in Mahajana from forces loyal to the old president.  They fail. Heavy fighting erupts in Sambava, resulting in 17 deaths.
Forces loyal to the new president (Marc Ravalomanana) try to sieze the airport in Mahajana from forces loyal to the old president.  They fail. Heavy fighting erupts in Sambava, resulting in 17 deaths.
Protest from taxi drivers and other residents of Toamasina over new tax on gas.
Forces loyal to two claimants to the presidential office clash on the resort island of Nosy-be.
Ravalomanana supporters loot Indian owned shops after they capture the town from Didier Ratsiraka.  The locals believe the town's ethnic Indians supported Ratsiraka.  Shops burned, 3 injured.
Soldiers loyal to Marc Ravalomanana advance through province of Diego Suarez.  Several soldiers are reported killed.
Lecturers observe a go-slow strike to demand a review of their salaries.
Former reservists and volunteer supporters of the president demand payment for their support.
Magistrates strike, demaning a pay hike.
Army reservists surround parliament and take deputies hostage, demanding payment for their support of Marc Ravalomanana.
Students demonstrate several times to protest the rising cost of public transport.
Demobilized army reservists demonstrate to demand pay for supporting Marc Ravalomanana.  One throws a grenade.
3FN, a protest group organized by former president Albert Zafy, protests against president Marc Ravalomanana.  The president's supporters arrive and violently break up the rally.
Series of grenade attacks against government targets ahead of an election.
Police fire tear gas to disperse hundreds of people trying to meet an exiled political leader as he returns to the country.
A group of soldiers and a general call for the president to resign and hole up inside a military base.  Gunfire is exchanged with govt. forces.  1 dies.
Tens of thousands of supporters of Antananarivo mayor Andry Rajoelina rally, strike, and protest against the government of president Marc Ravalomanana, accusing him of mis-spending public funds and threatening democracy.
Tens of thousands of supporters of Antananarivo mayor Andry Rajoelina rally, strike, and protest against the government of president Marc Ravalomanana, accusing him of mis-spending public funds and threatening democracy.
Hundreds of people protest the firing of the capital's mayor.
A protest called by the capital's mayor ends when the police open fire.  Sporadic riots continue for several days.
Several days of protests organized by opposition leader Andry Rajoelina, accusing the government of threatening democracy, misspending public funds, and giving land away to South Korean company Daewoo, and calling on the president to resign.
More than 25,000 people gather in government sponsored demonstrations to show their support for the president.
Looters riot.  Police open fire.
Thousands of people are called out into the streets by the opposition leader after his talks with the government break down.  Police use deadly force in Fianarantsoa.
Thousands of people are called out into the streets by the opposition leader after his talks with the government break down.  Police use deadly force in Fianarantsoa.
Protests resume against the government over democracy and economic assets.  Police use deadly force to disrupt opposition rallies.  Several deaths occur when police and opposition protesters clash.
Protests resume against the government over democracy and economic assets.  Police use deadly force to disrupt opposition rallies.  Several deaths occur when police and opposition protesters clash.
Soldiers mutiny to protest the government repression of opposition protesters.  They set up several road blocks.  On the 11th, the leader of the mutineers claims control of the army.  On the 16th and 17th, soldiers storm the presidential palace
Hundreds of pro-government demonstrators protest outside the French embassy, accusing it of sheltering opposition leader Andry Rajoelina.
Over ten thousand of the old president's supporters protest against newly installed president Andry Rajoelina for several consecutive days.  Supporters of the two throw rocks at each other on the 25th until they are dispersed with tear gas.
About 400 Central Bank employees strike after threats are made to the bank's independence.
Thousands of the old president's supporters demonstrate.  The police open fire with bullets and tear gas.  Protests escalate to riots, leaving scores wounded.
Military forces raid the constitutional court and round up several soldiers that remained loyal to the old president.  Several parliamentarians are also arrested.
Over 10,000 supporters of the country's ousted president stage a demonstration for a return to the constitutional process.
A small homemade bomb explodes in a shopping center.  The bombers are believed to be supporters of the ousted president.
An unidentified man is killed when he tries to bomb a government office.  Two gunmen try to attack a radio station owned by the president, but they are shot dead by guards.  The suspects are believed to be supporters of the ousted president.
Hundreds of protesters demonstrate in support of the ousted president.  Police repress with tear gas.
Several hundred people protest in favor of a political settlement.  Police use tear gas.
Police use tear gas to disperse several hundred protesters angered by the regime's rejection of international mediation in the ongoing political crisis.
Citizens protest the military-backed leader and demand elections.
Protesters boo the military-backed President marking the anniversary of a nationalist uprising.
Soldiers attempt a coup by kidnapping the Prime Minister and setting bombs in officials' houses.
Citizens protest police abuse, prompting some police to mutiny.  Soldiers stormed the barracks to quash the police rebellion.
Supporters of the ousted president protest government abuses.
Soldiers attempt a coup and take over a base, prompting soldiers and citizens to rally against Rajoelina. Soldiers attack on the last day.
Citizens gather to support the mutinous soldiers and demand Rajoelina step down.
Citizens march and demand political stability.
Unknown bombers target the military chief who led the 2009 coup.
Police use tear gas to disperse anti-government protesters.
Security forces fired tear gas to disperse a small group of Protesters gathered in support of former president Albert Zafy.  Municipal authorities had not given permission for the protest.
Thousands of people gathered along the road from the airport to Antananarivo to greet returning former leader Marc Ravalomanana.  His flight was turned back to South African, and one supporter was killed in internal scuffles within the crowd.  The capital's head of security General Richard Ravalomanana said security forces were not involved.
Police used tear gas to dispearse between 3,000 and 5,000 unauthorized Protesters who had gathered in support of opposition radio station, radio Free FM.
The police and army successfully put down a mutiny attempt lead by Koto Mainty, who was killed during the fighting.  The mutiny was staged out of the Ivatu military base near Antananarivo after renegade soldiers killed the officer sent to negotiatie with them.  Soldiers who participated in the mutiny were reportedly paid to do so.
Following an attempted mutiny, soldiers cut power to opposition radio Free FM, keeping it off the air for over 7 hours.  The military then gathered outside the station, causing its staff to take their equiptment and flee.  Soldiers late seized a computer screen and a voltage regulator.
A bomb was placed under the car of an army officer while it was parked outside a nightclub.  The explosion injured three people, none fatally.
Villagers ambushed cattle thieves, killing 67 in one attack and 23 in a subsequent ambush.  Several clashes afterwards left both police and thieves dead.  Authorities established security areas to avoid reprisal attacks by the thieves.
Over several months, students and staff engaged in sometimes violent protests at Antananarivo University to protest unpaid grants and salaries.  After one final bout of unrest, authorities announced that students would receive one month's scholarship with an equipment grant, while staff would get their unpaid salaries.
Police, as part of their operation to stop cattle thieves in the country's south,admitted to killing 27 thieves as well as at least two villagers.  They have also been accused to killing children and elderly villagers as they set fire to villages during the operation
Local protesters, armed with spears, trapped 200 mine employees inside a mine for four days protesting the low prices of minerals and demanding more people be hired. Police broke up the riot.
Locals stormed a prison to get ahold of the murderer of a local nun. Police shot dead one protestor
Local villagers hunted down and murdered European tourists after rumors spread that they stole the organs of children
Residents rioted during the elections. One poll worker was killed while another was kidnapped
Grenade exploded as bus stop near stadium where new president had been inaugurated hours earlier, killing 1 toddler and wounding 37 people
Week of unrest between cattle thieves, villagers and army over theft of prized zebu cattle, 22 people killed, 275 homes razed, 3,000 people forced to flee
80 Malagasy men (dahalos) armed with hunting rifles took off with 150 zebu cattle in a village tradition of proving their valour; when chased down by security and villagers 13 dahalos were killed
theft of 300 zebu cattle led to confrontation between nearly 100 armed men and six parliamentary police officers; two police officers killed
up to 300 people rallied in support of former president Marc Ravalomanana, who was placed under house arrest after returning from exile; protesters threw stones and police officers and set fire to cardboard boxes; police responded with tear gas and arrested three people including a politician
500 workers demanded release of two senior labor leaders, police fired tear gas and live ammunition, 2 people were killed, 9 wounded, plant's sugar stocks looted and building set on fire, police reported that some workers had guns and machetes; Day 2: policeman and soldier posted to factory were slashed to death with knives; workers are demanding better wages and contracts for seasonal workers
Hundreds of people tried to ransack the offices of Jirama company (provider of Madagascar's electricity and water services), burning front door and smashing windows with rocks; this port town has been experiencing regular power cuts; 1 person killed, and 5 injured including 3 policemen
Residents of Tomasina protested continuing rolling electricity blackouts; three were arrested, one of whom died in the hospital later that day.
Nickel miners went on strike at the Sheritt-owned Ambatovy nickel mine to protest  the company's refusal to evacuate a sick worker, who later died in the hospital.
Soldiers clashed with cattle rustlers outside of Ankazoabo, killing 8 soldiers and 15 cattle thieves.
Soldiers and police conducted raids on gangs of cattle thieves who had stolen over 2,800 cattle from Miangaly, killing fourteen thieves, three villagers, and one policeman.
Demonstrators angered by the death of a popular reggae singer in jail rampaged through the Mauritian capital for the third straight day, hurling firebombs at police stations and wounding 30 officers, a newspaper said.
It is the first international match to be played on Mauritian soil since the local league competition was disbanded in March last year following crowd violence resulted in the deaths of seven people.
Employees from the company on Saturday held a protest march to express their concern at privatisation plans.
Hundreds of Chagos Islanders have renewed calls on Britain, which claims the Indian Ocean archipelago where a stategic US airbase is sited, to pay them compensation and to allow them to return to their homelands.
Customs officials on the tiny Indian Ocean island of Mauritius were on strike Wednesday after a Canadian was named their boss.
Some 1,000 civil servants assigned to tax collection in Mauritius went on strike Tuesday to protest a government bill aimed at restructuring their operations to make them more efficient, union officials said.
Police on the Indian Ocean island of Mauritius on Wednesday raided a dormitory housing more than 1,500 Chinese garment workers to end a bizarre 72-hour standoff over the body of a deceased employee.
The campaign has been charged but relatively peaceful despite an incident last weekend in which a government supporter was killed during a confrontation with opposition backers.
Supporters of former primer minister Ramgoolam protested after he was arrested and questioned in relation to a 2011 burglary.
General strike leads to nationwide clashes between police and citizens
Muslims protest involvement in Persian Gulf and in support of Iraq
300,000 Muslims march protesting U.S. government and Moroccan involvement in Persian Gulf
Jailed militants of the Marxist-Leninist Ilal-Amam party go on hunter strike protesting brutal treatment
Supporters protest after candidate claims he was robbed of seat
Islamic militants attack Spanish tourists in a hotel
A suicide bomber, angry about the war in Chechnya, blew up a bomb in the Russian Embassy
Media workers protest government aggression against journalists
Communist legislators boycott Parliament on day of King's visit, protesting human rights record
During general strike, workers clash with police
Prisoners hold hunger strike in protest of substandard conditions
Students already striking in protest of insufficient transport turn to Islamic fundamentalist claims and clash with police
May Day march turns into protest against Israeli position on Palestine
Citizens protest high unemployment rates
Citizens protest high unemployment rates
Striking miners violently clash with police
Algerian detainees belonging to Islamic Salvation Front go on hunger strike, protesting prison conditions
Police charged at students staging illegal protest of high unemployment
Citizens protest U.S. strikes against Iraq
Citizens stone arriving motorcade in protest at expropriations carried out to make way for new roads
Muslims hold opposing rallies, both supporting and protesting government moves to improve women's rights
Muslims hold opposing rallies, both supporting and protesting government moves to improve women's rights
Port workers strike, demanding higher wages for temporary employees
Journalists hold 1-hr strike to protest harsh treatment by government
Demonstrators march in protest of Israeli handling of clashes in Jerusalem
Demonstrators march in protest of Israeli handling of clashes in Jerusalem
Truck drivers strike, urging government to allow them to increase weight of allowed loads
Fundamentalists protest discrimination in front of parliament and are violently dispersed by police
Fundamentalists protest discrimination in front of parliament and are violently dispersed by police
University students attack homeless youths after female university student raped
131 prisoners go on hunger strike to protest human rights abuses
Citizens march to show their support for Palestine and condemn Israeli action
Detained alleged terrorist goeso n hunger strike to protest poor conditions and arrest of his wife
Youths protest Spanish occupation of disputed island
Human rights group accuses government of engaging in mass kidnappings and torture of suspected Islamic fundamentalists
Voters protest irregularities in election, in some locations clash with police
protesters accuse Qatar of being an accomplice to U.S. aggression in Iraq
protesters demonstrate against possible U.S. military action in Iraq, claiming religious discrimination
protesters demonstrate against possible U.S. military action in Iraq, claiming religious discrimination
protesters demonstrate against possible U.S. military action in Iraq, claiming religious discrimination
Demonstrators protest U.S. threats of military action against Iraq
Demonstrators protest U.S. military action in Iraq
Jailed journalist goes on hunger strike to protest poor living conditions
Four car bombs explode in Casablanca, killing 20
Citizens gather to protest terrorist attack at each location of the bombings
Citizens protest global terrorism
Defense attorneys of fundamentalist preachers walk out of trial, protesting unfair treatment
protesters demonstrate against free trade agreement with United States
Striking fishermen stage sit-in protesting new state restrictions
Citizens stage protests and attack aid convoys in an attempt to steal food after devastating earthquake
Pilots protest, demanding higher wages and better working conditions
Citizens protest occupation of Iraq and Palestine and U.S. plans for Middle East
Citizens protest arrival of Colin Powell and U.S. policies in Iraq
Citizens demonstrate in support of newspaper arguing tsunami disaster was punishment for sex tourism in Asia
Citizens protest demanding release of prisoners held by Polisario Front
Prisoners go on hunger strike to protest poor living conditions and press for release
Independence supporters clash with police
Muslims protest abuse of Koran by United States
Muslims protest abuse of Koran by United States
Citizens stage a sit-in to deny Spanish envoy entry into Western Sahara
Muslims stage demonstration in support of Islamist spokeswoman on trial
Police violently evacuate human rights workers, drive them through the desert and expel them from Morocco
Prisoners go on hunger strike to protest poor living conditions and press for release
Would-be immigrants attack border guards in repeated pushes to cross Spanish border
Deported immigrants go on hunger strike in attempt to convince Spanish government to reconsider immigration
Pro-independence citizens protest and riot prior to upcoming anniversary of annexation
Detained asylum seekers go on hunger strike in attempts to gain refugee status
Moroccans stage protest against visiting Spanish PM, allegiing occupation of two islands
Muslims protest cartoon depicting Prophet Muhammad
Citizens protest visit of Donald Rumsfeld and U.S. policies in Iraq
Islamists detained since 2003 go on hunger strike protesting poor living conditions and demanding a trial
Hopeful immigrants rush border crossing and attack guards in attempt to cross into Spain
Muslims demonstrate in support of Hezbollah and Hassan Nasrallah
YouTube video surfaces depicting police violently beating women protesting for independence
protesters demonstrate against Saddam Hussein's execution and U.S. policies in Iraq
Students protest for independence and are brutally beaten by police
Suicide bomber detonates in an internet caf?.
Former imprisoned independence supporters demand compensation from Moroccan government
Four suicide bombers detonate in a building, killing 5
Two suicide bombers detonate close to the U.S. Embassy
Citizens protest recent suicide bombings
Students clash with police after attempts to break up a sit-in protesting Moroccan position on Western Sahara
Demonstrators protest trials of seven detainees for attacking religious values.
Demonstrators protest trials of seven detainees for attacking religious values and are violently beaten by police
Prisoners go on a hunger strike in attempts to force guards to transfer them closer to their families
Prisoners go on hunger strike supporting fellow detainees and attempting to draw media attention
A man attempts to set off a bomb in a gas station, but only injures himself
Citizens clash with police during protest over high food prices
Son of former Mauritanian president goes on hunger strike in prison, alleging abuse of human rights.
Citizens protest visit of Spanish royals and vow to reclaim territory
Islamic militants riot against alleged gay marriage ceremony
Youths riot, protesting lack of available employment
Group of journalists boycott and protest football practice and news conferences, citing treatment from coach and players
Police arrest 47 students after clashes erupt between rival universities
Ethnic Saharawis march with the Polisario Front in commemoration of the 33rd anniversary of the Saharawi Republic
Islamist detainees stage hunger strike in solidarity with detainee transferred to Spanish prisons
Saharawis march to barrier erected by Morocan government and protest 'wall of shame.'
Newspapers refuse to publish editorials for a day in protest of heavy sentences passed on editors for defamation of the monarchy
Citizens protest Israeli minister's visit, condemning Israel's actions in Palestine
Western Sahara activists protest human rights abuses.
Protesters block a Spanish enclave, protesting Spanish violence and racism.
Western Saharans set up a camp to protest, demanding a better standard of living and more jobs.
Textile workers stage a sit-in, protesting the decision to close four textile plants.
Police attempt to dismantle a protest camp, resulting in clashes between activists and police.
Moroccans march in protest of a Spanish party's criticism of the raid in Western Sahara.
Arab Spring.  A Moroccan dies after self-immolating to protest his situation after being dismissed from the army.
Arab Spring.  Protests erupt in favor of constitutional reform, social justice, and economic reform.  37,000 people take to the streets.  Marches escalate to violence in Hoceima, where several people die after setting a bank on fire.
Over 1000 rally in Casablanca for reform.
A few hundred people rally in a pro-democracy demonstration.
A banned Islamist group stages an illegal protest.  Police make arrests and violent confrontations ensue.  Protesters seek refuge in the headquarters of the left wing Unified Socialist Party.
Protesters stage protests around the country to demand political change.
4000 people demonstrate to demand reform.
Thousands demonstrate across the country for greater political rights.
Al Qaeda in the Islamic Mahgreb detonates a bomb in a tourist caf?.
Demonstrators gather at the site of a terrorist attack to denounce Al Qaeda and to demand political reform.
Police break up a gathering of about 100 reform activists.
Police spend hours chasing hundreds of pro-democracy activists through the streets to prevent a demonstration from taking place.
Club wielding police on motorcycles disperse pro-democracy protesters.
Club wielding police on motorcycles disperse pro-democracy protesters.
Club wielding police on motorcycles disperse pro-democracy protesters.
Thousand protest the death of a protester in the prior week's demonstrations.
Thousand protest the death of a protester in the prior week's demonstrations.
Thousands march to demand greater democracy.
Over 10,000 protesters stage demonstrations against the King's proposed reforms.
Tens of thousands protest for and against a newly proposed constitution.  Riots occur in Casablanca.
Thousands of activists protest in favor of democracy.
Thousands of activists protest in favor of democracy.
Thousands of activists protest in favor of democracy.
Thousands of activists protest in favor of democracy.
Thousands of activists protest in favor of democracy.
Thousands of activists protest in favor of democracy.
Hundreds of activists protested Metallurgical Society of Imiter's operation of its Imiter silver mine. The protesters claimed the mining company was using too much local water, failing to provide locals with jobs, and generally neglecting to bring the mine's economic benefits back to the community.
3000 people demonstrate for political rights.  This is the first protest to occur after a several month hiatus.
Thousands protest in favor of democracy.
A soccer riot leads to 7 deaths.
A protester dies when he falls from a roof after being manhandled by police.
Thousands protest, calling for a boycott of upcoming elections.
At least 3000 people march, chanting slogans encouraging a boycott against elections.
Thousand of Berbers participated in protests throughout various regions of Morocco to demand the government for more democratic reform and more government services for Berbers.
Thousands of unemployed university graduates held extended protests in Rabat to express their discontent with the lack of jobs.
Two young men protested the lack of jobs by setting themselves on fire. One of the protesters later died.
A protest by youths over high unemployment rates grew violent and resulted in damage to public and private property and around one hundred and fifty injuries.
About a thousand demonstrators came out in Casablanca and another one thousand and five hundred in Rabat to celebrate the first anniversary of Morocco's reform movement. The protesters demanded more democratic reforms from King Mohammed VI.
About a thousand demonstrators came out in Casablanca and another one thousand and five hundred in Rabat to celebrate the first anniversary of Morocco's reform movement. The protesters demanded more democratic reforms from King Mohammed VI.
Supporters of the February 20 reform movement protested in Al Hoceima, Beni Bouayache, and Imzouren after police arrested Bachir Benchaib, one of the movements local leaders. Police used nonlethal methods such as water cannons to disperse crowds, but were eventually attacked by protesters who were also demanding more electricity and water for their villages.
Supporters of the February 20 reform movement protested in Al Hoceima, Beni Bouayache, and Imzouren after police arrested Bachir Benchaib, one of the movements local leaders. Police used nonlethal methods such as water cannons to disperse crowds, but were eventually attacked by protesters who were also demanding more electricity and water for their villages.
Supporters of the February 20 reform movement protested in Al Hoceima, Beni Bouayache, and Imzouren after police arrested Bachir Benchaib, one of the movements local leaders. Police used nonlethal methods such as water cannons to disperse crowds, but were eventually attacked by protesters who were also demanding more electricity and water for their villages.
Three hundred members of Morocco's Democratic League for Women's Rights held a sit-in demonstration outside the local court in Larache to protest the court's decision to allow a rapist to marry his victim. The young girl who was raped committed suicide, drawing attention to the law that allowed the marriage.
About two hundred women associated with the Democratic Association of the Women of Morocco protested outside the parliament building in Rabat. The group was angered by a law that allowed rapists to escape punishment by marrying their victim and had subsequently produced a young girl's suicide.
Hundreds of unemployed Moroccans protested outside the parliament as the government worked to pass its yearly budget. Police clashed with the protesters and forcibly removed some.
Poet Youssef Belkhdim held a sit-in protest to criticize the Moroccan government for its undemocratic behavior and was subsequently arrested.
Trade unions organized a protest of about twenty thousand in Casablanca to criticize the Moroccan government and Prime Minister Abdelilah Benkirane for failing to deliver on social and economic promises.
Thousands protested in Rabat and Casablanca, demanding the government address poor economic conditions and corruption.
Thousands protested in Rabat and Casablanca, demanding the government address poor economic conditions and corruption.
Activists, collectively numbering over one thousand, gathered in Rabat, Casablanca, and other cities to protest the government's human rights violations and inadequate economic reforms. The protest was organized by the February 20 movement, trade unions, and rights groups.
Activists, collectively numbering over one thousand, gathered in Rabat, Casablanca, and other cities to protest the government's human rights violations and inadequate economic reforms. The protest was organized by the February 20 movement, trade unions, and rights groups.
Activists, collectively numbering over one thousand, gathered in Rabat, Casablanca, and other cities to protest the government's human rights violations and inadequate economic reforms. The protest was organized by the February 20 movement, trade unions, and rights groups.
Activists, collectively numbering over one thousand, gathered in Rabat, Casablanca, and other cities to protest the government's human rights violations and inadequate economic reforms. The protest was organized by the February 20 movement, trade unions, and rights groups.
Dozens of February 20 activists protested against the monarchical rule of King Mohammed VI. Police beat several of the activists to disperse the protest.
Almost a thousand unemployed college graduates protested in Rabat, demanding the government solve the high jobless rate.
Around three hundred Muslims demonstrated outside the United States embassy in Casablanca. The protesters were angered by an offensive, anit-Muslim film created in the United States.
About two hundred Salafists protested after Friday prayers in Sale, burning U.S. flags and deploring the U.S. for the release of anti-Muslim film.
In Sale, two hundred Salafists followed Friday prayer with a protest against an anti-Muslim film created in the United States. The worhippers condemned President Obama and the United States in general.
Hundreds of the members of the February 20 movement protested in Rabat to demand the government address corruption instead of abusing activists.
February 20 activists protested high unemployment in Sidi Ifni. Police arrested multiple protesters.
Around two hundred Muslims gathered in Smir to protest the arrival of ship operated by Women on Waves, a group dedicated to providing free abortions.
In Rabat, approximately eight hundred magistrates organized a sit-in protest outside Morocco's highest court to demand less corruption in the country's judiciary.
Salafists destroyed eight thousand year-old stone carvings, considering the pagan depictions religiously offensive.
The family of twenty-three Sahrawis protested a government tribunal in Rabat. The family members, numbering about twenty, believed those on trial were wrongly accused of killing security forces two years earlier.
Dozens of activists, many belonging to the February 20 movement, protested in Rabat to express their disapproval for 2013 government budget. Police beat several activists in order to disperse the crowd.
A coaltion of hundreds of activists know as Spring of Dignity formed a human chain in Rabat to denounce the abuse of women. The activists called on Morocco to reform its laws so they might offer more protection to women.
Hundreds of members of the February 20 movement protested in Rabat against the government detention of fellow political activists.
Labor unions protested the Islamic government's new economic policies
Football fans from Rabat attacked shops in Casablanca
Opponents of child abuse protested current Moroccan laws
Street vendor set himself on fire in protest of the central government conviscating his goods
protesters demanded the release of February 20th, 2011 protesters
protesters demonstrated against the King's pardon of a Spanish man for paedophilia
protesters demonstrated against the jailing of an independent journalist
Saharan protesters demonstrated against a new water treaty between the EU and the Moroccan government
Saharan protesters demonstrated against the approved water deal with the EU. Demonstrations escalated to rioting
Pro-Independence Sahrawi protesters in Western Sahara are violently assaulted by plainclothes Police.
Thousands of Moroccans protest outside the French Embassy over offensive allegations of Moroccan torture.
Hundreds of Sub-Saharan immigrants are forcibly relocated to the capital often being robbed or injured in the process.
More than 200 people armed with knives attacked a football club robbing members and causing some injuries.
Around 8,000 union members demonstrate against government austerity plans to reign in spending.
A group of 800 Moroccans, mostly women, march demanding gender equality and safety.
Leftists students and Islamists clash after a political debate.
Tens of thousands of Moroccans demonstrated on International Labor Day to pressure the government to raise the minimum wage.
Tens of thousands of Moroccans demonstrated on International Labor Day to pressure the government to raise the minimum wage.
A young French national woman was found buried in a shallow grave.
Around 200 activists and family members of accused activists demonstrate calling for the release of pro-reform activists.
Two men kidnap a rights activists, assault and ridicule her for her activism before dumping her in the desert.
A leftist student dies after a 72 day hunger strike protesting his imprisonment.
A young man violently assaulted a Moroccan rabbi in response to Israel's war on Gaza.
Ethnic tensions between sub-Saharan migrants and Moroccans spill over into fighting.
1 Senegalese man is killed after ethnic tensions boil over. Protests against racism follow in the capital.
1 Senegalese man is killed after ethnic tensions boil over. Protests against racism follow in the capital.
Police arrest several unidentified assailants for attacking a man who drank alcohol.
Algerian soldiers fire on a group of Moroccans over the border seriously injuring one.
A 17-year old woman who was forced to marry her rapist is brutally attacked after seeking a divorce.
5 unidentified assailants are arrested and charged with terrorists acts after carrying out several knife attacks.
Security forces dismantled a migrant camp on a mountain overlooking the Spanish town of Melilla, and bussed around 1,200 people to southern Morocco.
Thousands of people, led by the Islamist Al Adl wal Ihsan movement, held a sit-in outside of a cemetary after police prevented them from burying the widow of a prominent religious leader. 
Around 1,500 people protested outside the French embassy to express opposition to a topless protest by two members of the French feminist group Femen that took place in front of a landmark earlier in the week.
Protests were held to express opposition to Nabil Ayouch's film "Much Loved," which centers around prostitution in Marrakesh.
Over 2,000 police and security forces conducted an operation to clear migrants squatting in apartment buildings in Tangier; one man was killed during the operation.
Around 100 journalists and activists protested outside of parliament to express solidarity with Ali Mrabet, a Moroccan editor who has been on a hunger strike in Geneva for a month in protest of harrassment by the Moroccan government.
Eight people smashed a ballot box at a polling station in a village north of Marrakesh.
Journalist Maati Monjib went on a hunger strike to protest government harrassment and a travel ban imposed against him.
Thousands of members of NGOs and labor unions demonstrated outside the Sweidsh Embassy to support a possible boycott of Swedish goods following reports that Sweden planned to recognize the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR)'s independence.
Political party calls for march demanding true democratic elections
Citizens boycott vote in protest of unfair elections
Muslims celebrate victory of Islamic Salvation Front
Three men with submachine guns attack two bars, kill 2 people, and steal liquor before escaping.
Citizens protest new law forbidding any language but Arabic
Muslims march in support of Iraqi government
Muslims burn flags of nations in anti-Iraqi alliance
Muslim man hijacks plane and demands to read a statement on television that demands postponement of parliamentary elections
Islamic Salvation Front riots, demanding Islamic state
Muslims strike, demanding a new election
Islamic Salvation Front organizes march to demand establishment of Islamic state
Islamic Salvation Front members launch hunger strike to protest extended detention without charges
Muslims march, demanding the establishment of an Islamic state
Berber ethnic group marches in support of the establishment of an Islamic state
1991 Algeria Government
Citizens march in support of democracy, protesting against the establishment of an Islamic state
The military forces the President to resign, fearing an alliance with fundamentalist Muslims and the establishment of an Islamic state
Police attack Muslims after prayers in order to keep them from collaborating
College students protest military rulers, demanding return of democracy
Muslims clash with police outside courthouses where members of Islamic Salvation Front stand trial
Muslims clash with police outside courthouses where members of Islamic Salvation Front stand trial
Muslims clash with police outside courthouses where members of Islamic Salvation Front stand trial
Students protest military regime
Police attack Muslims after prayers in an attempt to disperse them rapidly
Muslims attack and kill 8 policemen after Islamic Salvation Front banned
Muslim students protest military government
Muslim students stage violent protest after Islamic Salvation Front banned
Muslims and police clash during Muslim militant trials
Muslims clash with police during trials of Islamic Salvation Front members
Steel workers strike, demanding higher wages.  Leaders of the strike are arrested.
Muslim militants assassinate head of ruling council
Muslim militants clash with police
Muslim militants clash with police
Muslim militants clash with police
Muslim militants set off bomb in airport, killing nine and later clash with police
Muslim militants battle with police
Defense attorneys for accused members of the Islamic Salvation Front boycott proceedings, protesting military court infringement
Citizens march, protesting domestic terrorism
Newspapers refuse to publish for a day, protesting death of several journalists
Islamic Salvation Front leader goes on hunger strike to protest cruel treatment
Berbers strike, demanding recognition as an ethnic group
Citizens march in support of newly sworn in military leader
Women celebrate International Women's Day by marching against Islamic fundamentalists
Women march against violence from Islamic insurgency
Newspaper workers don't publish, protesting death of colleagues in insurgency
Citizens march in support of peace talks and an end to violence
Berbers strike and hold marches, demanding recognition as an ethnic group
Youths protest killing of popular singer by fundamentalists
Berbers protest, demanding official recognition of their language and protesting kidnapping of activist singer by fundamentalists
Berbers strike, demanding official recognition of the Berber language
Journalists strike, protesting multiple attacks by fundamentalists
Berbers strike, demanding official recognition of the Berber language
Berbers protest, demanding official recognition of their language
Citizens protest talks with fundamentalists
Dock workers strike, demanding all dockers be given the same pay scale
Prisoners riot and attempt to escape, leading to severe repression from guards
Women's liberation group holds a mock trial in which fundamentalists are sentenced to death to protest crimes against women
Berbers strike and hold marches, demanding official recognition of their language
Citizens protest murder of five foreigners and an Algerian
Youths protest assassination of popular football fan
Oil workers strike, demanding oil companies align themselves with particular fuel group
FIS leader goes on a hunger strike, protesting denial of rights to see his family and attorneys
Journalists strike, protesting multiple attacks by fundamentalists
Workers strike, protesting government decision to withhold pay from public sector workers
Pilots strike, demanding higher wages
Journalists strike, demanding freedom of cartoonist jailed for poking fun at the flag
University lecturers strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens protest at the scene of a car bombing that killed 42 people
Islamic Salvation Front leader goes on a hunger strike to protest prolonged detention without trial
RCD members protest daily outside headquarters, claiming election fraud
Union members march, protesting terrorism
Socialist party protests terrorism
Socialist party protests alleged unfair elections
Citizens protest election fraud
Citizens protest election fraud
Citizens strike, protesting election fraud
Industrial workers strike, protesting government privatisation plans that would lead to layoffs
Berbers protest, demanding official recognition of their language
Berber youths riot, protesting killing of popular singer by fundamentalists
Berbers march, protesting fundamentalist violence
Berbers protest, demanding official recognition of their language
Berbers strike, protesting Arabic-only law
Socialist party protests, demanding Berber language be given official recognition
Air Algerie staff strike, protesting announced job losses
Teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Newspapers refuse to publish, protesting governmental restrictions on press freedoms
Judges strike, protesting article published that called them 'incapable'
Citizens march for press freedom following gagging of two independent newspapers
Journalists protest government's suspension of three newspapers
Postal workers strike, demanding higher wages
Women protest outside human rights office, demanding government stop insurgency
Citizens gather in protest of election fraud that caused several candidates to drop out
Citizens protest after presidential poll, alleging fraud
Citizens protest after presidential poll, alleging fraud
Relatives of terrorism victims protest plans to legalize Islamic Salvation Party
Citizens march, commemorating one-year anniversary of popular singer's death but begin to attack local offices when presenting a petition for a new official enquiry
Citizens march against referendum allowing amnesty for fundamentalists
Citizens protest amnesty for fundamentalists
Citizens protest amnesty for fundamentalists
Youths riot after funeral of boy accidentally shot by police
Citizens protest police crackdown on Berbers
Citizens protest police crackdown on Berbers
Berbers protest, demanding police leave the region and citing unemployment and discrimination
Citizens protest deaths of ethnic Berbers in clashes with police
Lawyers protest police repression of Berbers during riots
Berbers protest police repression
Lawyers protest police repression of Berbers during riots
Berbers clash with police after mass march
Journalists protest new laws that stifle media and show solidarity with Berbers
Women protest police crackdown on Berbers; after march, youths clash with police
Newspapers don't publish, protesting new laws that restrict freedoms
Citizens protest government crackdown in Berber region
Citizens protest brutal treatment of Berbers
Citizens protest brutal treatment of Berbers
Citizens march in memory of Berber victims of police repression
Women protest police repression of Berbers
Group protests repression of ethnic Berbers
Youths attack police after argument over Berber youths
Citizens march for democracy and denounce unrest
Citizens clash with police in retaliation for police brutality
Citizens clash with police in retaliation for police brutality
Citizens clash with police in retaliation for police brutality
Berbers march, commemorating the death of a popular singer at the hands of Islamic fundamentalists. After march, youth briefly clash with police
Citizens hold anti-government, protesting recent violence in the Berber region
Berbers attempt to protest and present the President with a list of demands, but are dispersed by police
Youths clash with police after Berber protest canceled
Berbers protest water shortages and discrimination in housing allocations
Berbers protest water shortages and discrimination in housing allocations
Youths riot, demanding the release of local officials arrested for mismanagement
Citizens march, protesting police brutality
Citizens march, protesting government repression of Berbers
Citizens protest, demanding resignation of mayor, who opens fire into the crowd
Berbers clash with police as planned proteset is thwarted
Berber youths clash with police, protesting discrimination
Citizens protest government treatment of ethnic Berbers
Juvenile prisoners riot, setting fire to items in their cells
Berbers attempt illegal protest against government refusals to satisfy their demands
Citizens riot, protesitng lack of democratic institutions
Berbers attack police, demanding they leave Kabyle region after brutality
Berbers excluded from official Berber meetings ransack offices
Berbers march, urging government to cede to their political demands
Citizens protest, demanding government provide assistance for citizens displaced by torrential rains
Berbers clash with police as government talks on Berber rights begin
Berber protest to demand release of youths detained over previous clashes erupts in violence
Citizens protest, demanding Berber new year be declared a holiday
Berber strike turns into riot as Berbers demand punishment for security forces involved in previous repression
Citizens riot, demanding better living conditions in their city
Teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Berbers hold demonstration to remember Berber activist
Berber youths attack police chief when he visits town where Berber youth died in police custody
Citizens riot, protesting the way local authorities allocated 1200 dwellings in the town
Berbers riot after police attempt to crackdown on Berber region
Berbers hold demonstration, remembering death of youth that died in police custody
Riots break out in five prisons following a fire that killed 23 inmates
Berbers strike, protesting a masquerade of municipal elections
Prisoners protest and riot over inhumane conditions
Berbers hold anti-government protest, demanding release of tribal leaders arrested for disturbing the peace
Students throw stones at President when he visits campus, protesting repression of Berbers
Berbers attack civil servants and force offices to close and call strike to protest corrupt regime
Youths attempt to kill Workers' Party candidate
Citizens riot, protesting water shortages
Citizens riot, protesting water shortages
Berbers strike and attempt to hold a protest, but attack police when they refuse to allow it
Citizens attack police as they attempt to bulldoze shantytown
Berbers attack voters and polling stations in an attempt to stop elections
Hospital workers strike, demanding higher wages
Citizens clash with police, demanding governmental aid to repiar houses damaged by rain
Berber youths detained for protests go on hunger strike
Citizens clash with police as they attack city hall, protesting appointment of local mayor
Police thwart Berbers attempting to protest government repression
Berbers strike and attack police, protesting police repression
Berbers march demanding release of activists detained for protests
Berbers march demanding release of activists detained for protests
Citizens strike, protesting privatization plans and demanding better living standards
Citizens march, protesting U.S.-led war in Iraq
Airline workers stage sit-in at Algiers Airport to protest privatisation plans of the airline
University students hold protest in support of Berber cause
Berbers strike and march, demanding release of activists detained for previous protests
Prisoners riot after being left out of mass pardon
Citizens attack President as he visits town destroyed by earthquake
Citizens stage sit-in before President arrives, demanding government provide more relief for quake victims
Newspapers stage one-day strike, protesting harassment by government authorities
Teachers strike, demanding higher wages
Railway workers strike, demanding higher wages
Lawmakers protest court decision to freeze party's assets
National Liberation Front lawmakers hold protest, demanding resignation of President for corruption
Chinese construction workers attack police cars, protesting unpaid wages
Youths riot, protesting preferential treatment of youths from Algiers for oil jobs
Citizens riot, protesting the way elections are being organized
Youths riot, protesting unemployment and water shortages
Berbers riot during Bouteflika's campaign stop, protesting his treatment of ethnic Berbers
Opponents of Bouteflika riot and attack police after he is re-elected
Youths riot, protesting government plans to raise oil prices
Algerians protest cartoons that contain a caricature of Muhammad
Youths riot after youth is killed during his attack on a policeman
Citizens riot, protesting poor housing conditions and domestic violence
Victims of terrorism bury voting cards and copies of peace charters to protest proposed amnesty plans for fundamentalists
Citizens rally against fundamentalists after suicide attacks kill over 30
Disgruntled fans throw stones at players during a game, halting play until rioters were arrested
Citizens march against fundamentalists
Citizens protest after flash floods, demanding more aid and better resources to search for survivors
Students and teachers close university for a day, protesting violence by students
Citizens attempt illegal anti-Israeli protest and are dispersed by police
Citizens march, protesting Israeli persecution of Muslims. Hundreds of protesters clash with police
Berbers clash with Muslims outside mosque
Football fans clash over match
Youths torch voting stations, protesting unfairness of elections
Steel workers strike, demanding better working conditions and higher wages
Chinese traders clash with Algerian shopkeepers over price disputes
Rival football fans riot, leaving dozens seriously injured
Citizens riot as police attempt to tear down poor housing
Algerian youths ransack Egypt Air offices, protesting attacks on Algerian football players in Cairo
Workers clash with police during a strike over higher wages.
Islamists torch a Christian church.
Steel workers go on strike over failure to renovate a factory.
Protesters demonstrate against an Israeli raid on an aid flotilla and are dispersed by police.
Steel workers strike to push for higher wages.
Christians protest at the trial of two Christians for breaking Ramadan fasting rules.
Steel workers strike, demanding higher wages.
Arab Spring.  Riots occur over rising food prices and chronic unemployment.  Police respond with deadly violence.  A wave of dozens of self-immolations sweeps the country.  3 die during the riots, 4 die in the immolations.
Arab Spring.  Rock and chair throwing protesters defy a ban on public gatherings and clash with police, they also demand radical change to the regime.  20,000 police stop the protests, leaving 5 dead and 800 hurt.
Arab Spring.  More than 10000 protesters march against authorities to decry food prices and unemployment, they also demand radical change to the regime.
An Italian woman is kidnapped by bandits
Security forces clash with a splinter group of the Armed Islamic Group (GIA).
Arab Spring, the day after Hosni Mobarak's resignation.  Protesters march against authorities to decry food prices and unemployment and also to demand radical change to the regime.  About 400 people are arrested.
Arab Spring, the day after Hosni Mobarak's resignation.  Protesters march against authorities to decry food prices and unemployment and also to demand radical change to the regime.  About 400 people are arrested.
Arab Spring.  Scattered protests and strikes around the country as dissidents demand a variety of social benefits and political reform.
Arab Spring. Students rally as part of the Arab Spring.  They demand that the government scrap a new law that dilutes the value of their diplomas by giving equal status to less qualified degree holders in the job market.
Arab Spring.  Unspecified political party protests to demand the ouster of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika.
Arab Spring.  Protesters march against authorities to decry food prices and unemployment; they also demand radical change to the regime.
Community police, a force that protects villages from Islamist groups, protest in the capital to demand a pay raise.
Islamists explode a bomb, destroying a vehicle full of bird hunters.  Five are killed.
Arab Spring. About 40 demonstrators call for the end of the president's regime.
Activists protest in Algiers.
A crowd of youths throw stones and molotov cocktails in an attempt to stop bulldozers from demolishing illegally built homes.
Arab Spring. A few dozen demonstrators turn out in central Algiers for what has become a weekly ritual denouncing the president.
Arab Spring. Hundreds of specialist doctors strike to demand better pay.  They are later joined in protests by auxiliary police, university students, and court clerks.
Arab Spring. A few dozen demonstrators turn out in central Algiers for what has become a weekly ritual denouncing the president.
A bomb explodes in a village, killing 5.
Arab Spring. Student demonstrators clash with police forces.
Islamists bomb a military convoy in the desert.
2011 Algeria Hotels
Arab Spring.  A group of doctors attempts to march on government buildings, but are blocked by police.
Islamic militants attack a military barracks.
Health care unions stage a week long strike.
Former army conscripts protest to demand food allowances, priority for housing, and the right to establish their own association.
Steel workers strike for higher pay at the El Hadjar complex (owned by Arcelor Mittal) in Annaba.
Islamic militants detonate a road side bomb, killing four policemen.
Air crew at the national airline stage a last-minute strike.
250 former army conscripts protest to demand food allowances, priority for housing, and the right to establish their own association.
Islamic militants bomb a military patrol, killing one soldier.  A civilian is accidentally killed by soldiers during the ensuing gun battle.
15 Chinese employees of a construction company protest their employer's decision to send them home after the expiration of their work permits.  They close a road and ransack equipment.
Air Algerie staff strike for higher pay.
A roadside bomb wounds 11 soldiers.  3 suicide bombers are killed.
An Islamist suicide bomber blows himself up to avoid arrest.
Villagers protested against the government
Police arrest 25 unemployed people as they prepare to rally against joblessness near the presidential compound.
Unions in the education sector stage a strike over a wage dispute.
Railway unions stage a strike over a wage dispute.
Lawyers strike to protest against proposed changes in their professional organization which will limit their independence and powers in court.
90 workers at a Chinese telecommunications company go on strike to demand higher wages, better career opportunities, and a collective bargaining agreement.
Algerian citizens quit work at several gas fields in protest of the employment of foreign personnel. This turned into more widespread protests after security forces harassed several elderly citizens at a bus stop. Police turned out in force to stop the protests with tear gas- arresting and injuring several.
Locals clashed with police forces after the suicide by self-immolation of a young merchant. At least 30 were injured.
Several gunmen attacked a police patrol, killing two officers and injuring two others.
Dozens of opposition legislators walked out of Parliament, carrying protest signs, to decry what they believed to be an unfair election.
Two police officers were killed and several others were wounded when unidentified assailants fired upon barracks near Tizi Ouzou.
Four border guards were killed in an ambush by heavily armed gunmen.
Government workers went on strike to demand salary increases.
A group disguised as checkpoint guards stopped and boarded a bus, leafing through the passengers' identification to find and kill two members of the military.
Disgruntled citizens southeast of Algiers tried to disrupt local elections by breaking equipment and ransacking polling places. Clashes broke out with the police before order was restored.
Disgruntled citizens southeast of Algiers tried to disrupt local elections by breaking equipment and ransacking polling places. Clashes broke out with the police before order was restored.
Algerian troops killed six armed Islamists
Three militants were killed and two were injured when trying to  cross the border and weapons were seized
Scores of Islamist gunmen killed two people and took 41 Westerners and hundreds of others hostage as a revenge attack against the Algerian government for opening its airspace to French warplanes hitting Islamists in Mali as well as in retaliation for France's intervention in Mali and to demand the release of 100 Islamists held in Algeria
Members of an armed Islamist group attacked a gas pipeline and killed two village guards and wounded seven others
Algerian troops clashed with 50 men armed with rocket-propelled grenades who attacked a barracks, six soldiers were wounded and two assailants were killed
A dozen Islamic extremist fighters were killed in clashes with Algerian security forces
A dozen Islamic extremist fighters were killed in clashes with Algerian security forces
 and sacked the mayor's office and police responded by firing tear gas
10,000 unemployed Algerians protested to demand jobs and an end to lawsuits against them
About 30 women dressed all in white marched to defend their traditional Islamic dress
Five Islamist fighters were killed by Algerian security forces
Hundreds of people protested to demand jobs, and widespread clashes broke out with police that destroyed several government buildings and seven people were arrested
Thousands of unemployed people held a protest
A policeman was killed and two wounded when they were ambushed by Islamists
Three auxilary policemen were killed by armed Islamists
About 200 young people protested outside parliament about the lack of job security in Algeria and police beat them with batons and arrested several of the protesters
Militants attacked a supply truck with a homemade mortar, killing two security agents
Soldiers killed three militants
12 people were injured when violence erupted between Chaambas and Berber Mozabite youths following a dispute over a Mozabite cemetery
Soldiers ambushed and killed four militants
Air Algerie pilots staged a strike over a series of contracts that Air Algerie had previously signed with the pilots as well as over salary-related issues
Four armed Islamic extremists were killed in a shootout with soldiers
A roadside bomb killed two forest rangers
About 300-500 people joined a public lunch during Ramadan to protest what they say is persecution of people who refuse to observe the religious fast
23 people were killed in week-long violence between members of the Arab Brabiche and Tuareg Idnan tribes
Around 300 protesters encircled the town hall to demand improved water supplies and the construction of a road to facilitate access to their village, and clashes broke out when security forces attempted to access the building by force and 19 people were arrested
Soldiers killed two armed Islamists in an operation
Algerians demanding work protested in 25 cities across the country
Algerians demanding work protested in 25 cities across the country
Algerians demanding work protested in 25 cities across the country
Six policemen were injured in clashes between Chaambas and Mozabites, and four people were arrested
50 people were injured, some of them stabbed, in the rush to get a place in line to get tickets for a World Cup soccer game
Rival fans hurled stones and Molotov cocktails at each other after a local football match, and police used tear gas to disperse the fans and arresting 132 hooligans suspected of torching shops, cars and houses
Algerian army helicopters killed a high-level al-Qaeda operative and four associates in the desert
Tensions between the Chaamba and Mozabite communities erupt into weeks of violence leaving several dead, 30 wounded and 30 shops set ablaze.
Around 100 gather to protest the Presidents decision to run for a fourth term. The protest is violently broken up by police.
Around 100 gather to protest the Presidents decision to run for a fourth term. The protest is violently broken up by police.
Soldiers open fire on a civilian car after it fails to stop at a checkpoint leaving 1 dead and 2 injured.
protesters from the Barakat movement are arrested for opposing the Presidents decision to run again and calling for a free and democratic Algeria. Another protest at Algiers University occurs a week later.
Algerian forces pursue and kill 11 Islamist militants in several different incidents
Algerian forces pursue and kill 11 Islamist militants in several different incidents
Inter-communal clashes rage for days leaving 3 dead and dozens wounded
Thousands of supporters and opponents of President Bouteflika stage rival demonstrations in Algiers.
Thousands gather to protest Bouteflika's candidacy and call for a boycott on elections.
Around 250 protest against President Bouteflika. Some protesters storm a venue and burn portraits of the president before assaulting a TV crew.
Algerian military forces kill a female terrorist suspect in a sweep of a Northeastern city.
Around 100 young protesters advocating for a boycott of elections disrupt a campaign rally by an opposition candidate's spokesperson.
Hundreds of students march from the university to local government headquarters calling for a boycott in elections.
Demonstrators heckle and then throw stones at the Prime Ministers motorcade.
Clashes between the Arab and Berber communities lead to the death of a young Mozabite and dozens wounded.
Three plain clothes security forces assault the wife of a journalist who cover opposition protests.
Barakat protesters gather on the eve of the election and are quickly arrested by Algerian police. Protests and violence breaks out on the election day.
Barakat protesters gather on the eve of the election and are quickly arrested by Algerian police. Protests and violence breaks out on the election day.
Algerian forces kill two Islamists. Several days later AQIM ambushes Algerian soldiers killing 14. During the ambush 1 militant was killed.
Algerian forces kill two Islamists. Several days later AQIM ambushes Algerian soldiers killing 14. During the ambush 1 militant was killed.
Around 400 Berbers gather to celebrate the anniversary of the Berber Spring and protest police repression.
12 Islamist militants were killed by Algerian forces near the border of Mali.
2 Islamist militants were killed by Algerian forces in the East of Algeria.
Dozens of Salafists protest against government plans to reopen synagogues closed during the civil war of the 1990's.
An IED in Northwestern Algeria kills seven Algerian soldiers.
A fan throws a rock from the stands hitting a soccer player in the head and killing him. Later autopsy shows that it was not the projectile but a severe locker room beating that killed him.
A militant group linked to Islamic State kidnapped a Frenchman threatening to kill him unless coalition airstrikes in Iraq are stopped. After several days the Frenchman is beheaded.
Islamist terrorists ambush and kill two Algerian soldiers.
Clashes between rival gangs of the Arab and Berber communities leave two dead. 1,500 police protest in Ghardaia over work conditions. Around 1,000 police in Algiers protest in solidarity.
Clashes between rival gangs of the Arab and Berber communities leave two dead. 1,500 police protest in Ghardaia over work conditions. Around 1,000 police in Algiers protest in solidarity.
Islamist militants ambush and kill three Algerian police officers.
Algerian forces fire on a group of Moroccans seriously injuring one.
Demonstrators protest against delays in government construction and water supply projects. Violent repression leaves 2 dead.
The mayor of a small town is shot dead and had his throat slit by unknown terrorists.
Algerian military operations kill the head of Jund al-Khilafa and 2 other terrorists.
Algerian army arrested 12 suspected terrorist cell members over a period of two weeks in multiple rural and urban areas.
Algerian army arrested 12 suspected terrorist cell members over a period of two weeks in multiple rural and urban areas.
Algerian army arrested 12 suspected terrorist cell members over a period of two weeks in multiple rural and urban areas.
Two thousand protesters  protested shale oil exploitation and its environmental impacts in the country's south.
Clashes between berbers and arabs left 10 wounded.
Thousands of protesters protested a caricature of the Prophet Muhammad in a French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo.
Algerian army killed 1 heavily armed Islamist in Tebessa.
Opposition and supporteres gathered to protest shale oil exploitation and its environmental impacts in the country's south by Sonatrach state energy giant, but were dispersed by the police.
protesters gathered to protest shale oil exploitation and its environmental impacts in the country's south by Sonatrach state energy giant, wounding 40 police officers.
Thousands of protesters in two cities protested shale oil exploitation and its environmental impacts in the country's south.
Thousands of protesters in two cities protested shale oil exploitation and its environmental impacts in the country's south.
Alregian army killed 4 Islamists in Oued Ouakser.
Alregian army killed 3 Islamists in Hamman Righa.
Alregian army killed 6 Katibat Ennour Islamic militants.
Algerian army killed 2 Islamists in Amrouna. 
Algerian army killed 25 AQIM Islamic extremists planning attacks on the capital.
Clashes between berbers and arabs in Berriane resulted in 1 death from wounds. 
Algerian army killed 2 Islamists in the Tizi Ouzou province. 
Clashes between berbers and arabs erupted across the Guerrara province and in the city of Ghardaia, leaving 22 dead.
Clashes between berbers and arabs erupted across the Guerrara province and in the city of Ghardaia, leaving 22 dead.
Clashes between berbers and arabs erupted across the Guerrara province and in the city of Ghardaia, leaving 22 dead.
AQIM killed 9 Algerian soldiers in a militant ambush.
Algerian army killed a "dangerous terrorist" Abou El-Hacen in the Tebessa region.
Algerian army killed 7 Islamists in the Tizi Ouzou province. 
Algerian army killed 2 AQIM Islamists in Azeffoun
Two officials of the PLO are assassinated.
Retrospective reporting on an attack on a bureau of the ruling party, later blamed on Islamic fundamentalists.
50,000 people stage pro-Iraq protest, burn American flags.
Unknown assassins kill a Dutch diplomat.
Intruders from Algeria cross the border and attack border guards, killing 6.  Reporting is retrospective.
150 Libyans on board an EgyptAir flight from Yemen riot and demand the pilot take the plane to Libya, in violation of UN sanctions.  The pilot tricks them and lands in Tunisia instead.  The passengers stage a sit in.
Violent riot between fans of two soccer teams.  3 dead.
High school students violent demonstrate in south Tunisia in early February over reports that the price of bread would rise.  Arrests made.
Students protest plans for new exams procedures.  They break windows and set a building on fire.  Police break up the demonstration with force.
20 Algerian Islamic insurgents attack a National Guard border post.  3 insurgents killed.
Prisoners stage hunger strike for two months over prison conditions and the charges against them.
Some 10,000 people join a rally attended by President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to voice support for Palestinian cause.
Police beat a journalist and two human rights workers as they deliver a petition to the Health Ministry.
Nearly 2000 lawyers stage strike to protest the trial of an opposition leader.  Later described as a one day strike.
Students protest Israeli military action against Palestinians.  Protest turns into violent battle between students and police.
Terrorist drives a gasoline truck into a synagogue and detonates it.  19 die, including many German tourists.  Al-Qaeda eventually takes credit.
Protests against the Iraq War.
Fans celebrating Tunisia's first African Nations Cup title riot, clash with police.
Protest over human and political rights.  Police forcibly disperse the crowd.
150 plain clothed police surround the CNLT building and rough up several members during a meeting.
Unknown number of lawyers stage sit-in outside a Tunis courthouse.
Protests staged against invitation to Ariel Sharon to attend a conference in Tunis.  There are violent interventions by police, including one incident at the University of Tunis.
7 oppositionists stage hunger strike to demand release of 400 prisoners.
French journalist and crew investigating lack of press freedoms are attacked and injured.
Fans of soccer clubs clash with one another.  Several are wounded.
Islamic militant group engages in gun battle with police over head scarf ban in public schools.  Two killed
Police attack a building held by the militant group.  All day gun battle results in 12 deaths.
Al Qaeda in North Africa abducts and holds hostage 2 Austrian hostages, demanding release of prisoners in Tunisia and Austria.  AQ takes the hostages out of Tunisia and holds them in Mali.
Violent clash between protesters and police over high unemployment and poor living conditions.  protesters throw Molotov cocktails, while police open fire on crowd, killing one.
2000 protesters demonstrate against the Israeli offensive in Gaza.
Violent demonstrations and riots against unemployment, corruption, and lack of democracy.  President Ben Ali resigns on 1/14/2011.
300 professors demonstrate after a colleague is killed during a police crackdown on ongoing protests.
Unknown assailants trade gunfire with police in front of the main opposition party's headquarters, and around the presidential palace.
Demonstrators demand the abolition of the ruling RCD party; they are repelled by police with tear gas
Riot police break up a protest led by a banned Islamist movement.
Teachers strike to demand that members of the ruling party stay out of power.
For the first time, a pro-government protest occurs during the Tunisian Revolution.  Clashes and riots occur.
The main trade union organizes a strike and a rally of 50,000 people, calling for the government to resign.
Police clash with demonstrators who set fire to a local police headquarters.
Tunis airport ground staff strike.
Police strike to be allowed to set up a union.
Police strike to be allowed to set up a union.
Police strike to be allowed to set up a union.
An unemployed Tunisian self-immolates to protest 'deplorable social conditions.'
Protests resume nationwide.  Some escalate to riots.
Hundreds demonstrate in favor of a secular state.
Thousands protest at the governmental palace to demand the ouster of the provisional government.
Over 100 activists protest in front of the Libya embassy over the repression used against the uprising there.
Protests escalate to riots between stone-throwing protesters and police.
Clashes erupt between residents of a town over jobs.  The clashes begin after a false employment offer allegedly posted by a phosphate mining company imposes tribal based employment quotas.
Hundreds of Islamists protest the country' secular laws.  Police use tear gas.
Hundreds of former ruling party members protest a new measure forbidding former party officials from running in elections.
Police break up a demonstration against the provision government with tear gas.
Al Qaeda militants fight with security forces.
Residents of a town clash with refugees from Libya.  The refugees protest because they believe they are going to sent back to their home countries (refugees are mainly foreign workers contracted to work in Libya).  Four Eritreans are killed.
Lorry drivers strike to demand better working conditions and to protest abusive layoffs.
Tribal factions clash after rumors surface about the recruitment policies of the region's main employer, a phosphate mining company.
Judges strike, demanding changes in the justice ministry, which they accuse of threatening them.
Riots occur in the birthplace of the Arab Spring.  Police open fire on rioters, killing a 14 year old boy.
Lawyers riot to protest corruption in the courts and too-lax verdicts against those connected to the old regime.
Clashes occur in the town of Douz.  The cause is unknown.
Teenage youths riot, looting shops.  Police open fire, killing one teenager.  In retaliation, residents of Sbeitla burn down the police station.
Fighting between rival clans over access to jobs.
Five people try to hang themselves after failing a competition to become teachers.  They are rescued by a crowd of bystanders.  The suicide attempt is followed by a sit-in.
Teenage youths clash with police.
200 Salafists storm a university campus after a female student wearing a full face-veil is not allowed to sign up.
Salafists attack the offices of a private TV station that aired Persepolis, a French-Iranian animation film in which God is portrayed as an old bearded man.
Salafists protest in front of a TV station that they accuse of blasphemy for airing a film with an image of God.  Police use tear gas.  Several hours later, about a hundred men fire bomb the TV station.  Thousands of marchers then gather to denounce the station.
Women protest to protect their rights after the election victory of an Islamist party.
Thousands protest over the exclusion of local residents from a list of those killed in the 2010 uprising.  Demonstrators set fire to a prison, rob a bank, and loot a government agency. Police use tear gas.
A sit-in by ultraconservative Muslims, who are not university students, demanding students be allowed to attend classes in the conservatve face veil
Border guards stop work, complaining of a lack of protection against armed fighters on the Libyan side of the border.
Liberal demonstrators rally in front of parliament to protest against extremism during the drafting of a new constitution.  Thousands of Islamists descend on the liberals, prompting a riot.  Police use tear gas.
A protest was held against the Tunis Military Tribunal
Students and faculty condemning the interruption of classes at a nearby university where Salafists are having a sit-in to demand the niqab can be worn in classes.
Four separate instances of self-immolation. This act has become a symbolic protest for unemployed people who have lost all hope.
Four separate instances of self-immolation. This act has become a symbolic protest for unemployed people who have lost all hope.
Four separate instances of self-immolation. This act has become a symbolic protest for unemployed people who have lost all hope.
Youths protested unemployment and the price of basic goods by heckling the visiting president and prime minister
Ultraconservatives chanted anti-Semitic slogans during the arrival of a top Hamas official
A protest and general strike against the lack of progress since Ben Ali fled. Locals say there are no jobs, no running water, no gas, and corrupt officials and investors.
Protests marking the one year anniversary of the ex-president's departure. Some protesters demanded jobs and dignity from the new government. Others called for recognition of those killed during the uprising. Certain groups called for an Islamic Tunisia or shouted anti-American slogans
Demonstrations and general strikes demanding jobs, housing, and regional development
A march to denounce the violence committed by ultraconservative Islamist groups in recent months. Islamists held a counter-protest nearby.
The ultraconservative Muslims protested the IMF visit, claiming IMF measures have only increased unemployment and impoverished the country
Border guards stopped a car at a checkpoint and the men inside opened fire with assault rifles.
A protest against the president's comments that they were an insignificant minority. Protesters called for Islamic law.
Municipal workers went on strike
Salafists, protesting the arrest of a man, threw petrol bombs and stones and tried to break into police stations. They also took control of many of the cities mosques and were broadcasting calls for a holy war.
Demonstrators tried to storm a conference being held by Arab and Western officials over the crisis in Syria. Protesters carried signs criticizing Clinton and Obama. The conference was working towards putting pressure on the Syrian president to step down and allow humanitarian aid
Trade members marched to denounce the Islamist-led government, which has growing tensions with the leftist opposition. The opposition has a strong presence in the union.
Students from the leftist student union and Salafis on the campus got into a fight
Protesters called for a clean up of the state television output, particularly Wataniyam whose directors were close with the ex-president. After approximately 50 days of protesting, Islamists clashed with the stations employees. The government then asked the protesters to leave and they did.
Eggs were thrown at the walls of mosques in Ben Guerdane and torn up pages of the Koran were found inside. In Tunis, stars of David were drawn on the walls of a mosque.
Eggs were thrown at the walls of mosques in Ben Guerdane and torn up pages of the Koran were found inside. In Tunis, stars of David were drawn on the walls of a mosque.
A demonstration calling for the assembly writing Tunisia's new constitution to apply Islamic law
People gathered to celebrate the state's anniversary of winning its independence from France and chanted slogans against the Salafists' campaign for an Islamist state
A rally demanding Islamic law become the main source of legislation. Anti-semitic slogans were chanted at the rally
A rally outside the national assembly building to protest normalisation of ties with Israel
Protesters chanted slogans against the government because they claimed nothing had changed since the revolution
Protesters gathered to denounce the protest ban on the main avenue and the power the Ennahda party has gained since the revolution. In tunis, police brutally clamped down on the event with tear gas and batons. Protesters clashed with police and threw objects at them, including a firebomb
Protesters gathered to denounce the protest ban on the main avenue and the power the Ennahda party has gained since the revolution. In tunis, police brutally clamped down on the event with tear gas and batons. Protesters clashed with police and threw objects at them, including a firebomb
A town exploded in protest in desperation for work when CPG could only take a fraction of those who applied. Protesters set a police station on fire and threw stones at police. They also set fire to the company's administrative buildings.
Weeks of camping outside of the jobs industry ended with a march condemning the new government's lack of action on the unemploymant issue. Some protesters threatened mass suicide if things were not changed.
The trial for a television station that screen a film insulting sacred values reopened, with protests in support and opposition of the defendant outside of the court house
A Tunisian taxi driver set himself on fire to call attention to his right to a plot of state-owned land
The ex-Prime Minister of Libya went on a hunger strike to resist a possible extradition and protest Tunisia's PM's comments denouncing refuge to those who threaten Libya's security.
Hardline Islamists gathered for their second annual meeting, waving black flags and chanting. The movement's objective is to apply Islamic law in Tunisia.
Unemployed people with university degrees protested that the government has taken no action to solve the unemployment problem
Salafists torched police stations and attacked bars selling alcohol
Salafists torched police stations and attacked bars selling alcohol
Judges went on strike to protest government removal of 82 judges for corruption and ties to the previous regime
Teachers and health workers went on strike calling for higher wages
Ennahda Party supporters protested against Tunisia's Central Court
Salafists demanded four works of art be taken down because they were offensive to sacred values. Supporters of the exhibit faced off with the men outside the gallery. That night, the salafists broke into the gallery and slashed multiple canvases and dismantled an installation. The following day, rioters tried to force their way into the gallery. In Tunis, police fired tear gas at salafists who torched and pillaged a  courthouse and multiple police stations. In Jendouba, a Salafist attacked a security guard.
Salafists demanded four works of art be taken down because they were offensive to sacred values. Supporters of the exhibit faced off with the men outside the gallery. That night, the salafists broke into the gallery and slashed multiple canvases and dismantled an installation. The following day, rioters tried to force their way into the gallery. In Tunis, police fired tear gas at salafists who torched and pillaged a  courthouse and multiple police stations. In Jendouba, a Salafist attacked a security guard.
Salafists demanded four works of art be taken down because they were offensive to sacred values. Supporters of the exhibit faced off with the men outside the gallery. That night, the salafists broke into the gallery and slashed multiple canvases and dismantled an installation. The following day, rioters tried to force their way into the gallery. In Tunis, police fired tear gas at salafists who torched and pillaged a  courthouse and multiple police stations. In Jendouba, a Salafist attacked a security guard.
Salafists demanded four works of art be taken down because they were offensive to sacred values. Supporters of the exhibit faced off with the men outside the gallery. That night, the salafists broke into the gallery and slashed multiple canvases and dismantled an installation. The following day, rioters tried to force their way into the gallery. In Tunis, police fired tear gas at salafists who torched and pillaged a  courthouse and multiple police stations. In Jendouba, a Salafist attacked a security guard.
Salafists demanded four works of art be taken down because they were offensive to sacred values. Supporters of the exhibit faced off with the men outside the gallery. That night, the salafists broke into the gallery and slashed multiple canvases and dismantled an installation. The following day, rioters tried to force their way into the gallery. In Tunis, police fired tear gas at salafists who torched and pillaged a  courthouse and multiple police stations. In Jendouba, a Salafist attacked a security guard.
Workers in the tourism sector demonstrated for peace outside of the tourism ministry, the interior ministry, and the national assembly building
Demonstrators blocked the main road in the region demanding a solution to their dried up water supply. Clashes with police followed
Opposition parties staged a walk out after Jebali overruled the president's objections and refused to allow debate about the extradition of Al-Baghdadi Al-Mahmoudi to Libya
The independent media authority shut down in protest, claiming the government was censoring the press
Workers who had not been paid their wages protested for a number of days, then attacked the provincial government headquarters and the local Ennahda headquarters
The union has a national walkout in protest of the dispersal of a sit-in and the detention of trade unionists
Mourou was hit on the head with a glass bottle during a conference on Islam and tolerance
Several organizations staged a protest against the government
A protest for women's right, denouncing the islamist-led government
Thousands protested against the Islamist party during a general strike
 The next day, they prevented an Iranian group from performing at a Sufi festival because their Shiite chanting violated sacred values
 The next day, they prevented an Iranian group from performing at a Sufi festival because their Shiite chanting violated sacred values
Salafists attacked at protest at a cultural festival with swords and sticks. The protest was organized to mark Jerusalem Day and denounce the presence of certain Arab guests. The Salafists were particularly angered about the presence of Lebanese militant Samir Kantar at the protest.
People clashed with Ennahda members who were accused of trying to take control of a local association. The following day, demonstrators demanded the peoples' release by attacking a police station and burning a car.
Journalists protested the Islamist-led government trying to take control of a press group after the appointment of Lofti Touati as its new director. Protesters demanded a free press.
Bearded men burst into a hotel bar, smashing bottles and chasing away customers before raiding the reception desk and upstairs rooms
Police officers repressed a Tunisian couple
Protesters occupied the governor's office then held a sit-in at the Tunisian labor union's office demanding work, justice, and compensation for those injured during the Tunisian uprising and they demanded the governor step down.
A protest calling for adminstrative purges in the media and political opposition
Strikes in a newspaper groups and two state-run TV channels in protest of their recently nominated directors, whom they claim are compromising their freedom of the press
Protests in response to an American film that mocks Islam. After several days, violence erupted as protesters began to throw petrol bombs and rocks and storm the embassy and attack an American school.
Prisoners protested against the Justice Ministry
Protests againsts unemployment and the high cost of living resulted in many activists getting arrested. In protest to this, there was a general strike in Menzel Bouzaiane, a teacher strike, and three PMs announced they were starting a hunger strike to pressure authorities to free the activists
Protests againsts unemployment and the high cost of living resulted in many activists getting arrested. In protest to this, there was a general strike in Menzel Bouzaiane, a teacher strike, and three PMs announced they were starting a hunger strike to pressure authorities to free the activists
Journalists have gone on a hunger strike demanding Touati resign as director of Dar Essabah. The hunger strike stopped for a meeting on the 12th, but resumed when their demands were still not met.
Protesters shouted slogans against the ruling Islamists and demanded the governor resign
A general strike in protest of marginalisation and high unemployment levels
A protest in support of a woman who was raped by police and is being accused of violating modesty laws
Students close to the Islamist party and activists with the main student union had a violent confrontation on campus
Protesters gathered to demand the governor's resignation. Some tried to break into the provincial government headquarters.
The trade union held a general strike to protest the absence of development projects
Demonstrators protesting the reopening of a rubbish site blocked access to the site and later in the day took to the streets and attacked the police
Supporters of Ennahda marched through town shouting their support to the Islamist party and the regional governor
Workers have stopped working, cut off the water, and seized equipment in demand that they be paid more. A demonstration was held demanding the local governor resign and part of the phosphate revenues be returned to the region
Workers have stopped working, cut off the water, and seized equipment in demand that they be paid more. A demonstration was held demanding the local governor resign and part of the phosphate revenues be returned to the region
Workers have stopped working, cut off the water, and seized equipment in demand that they be paid more. A demonstration was held demanding the local governor resign and part of the phosphate revenues be returned to the region
Workers have stopped working, cut off the water, and seized equipment in demand that they be paid more. A demonstration was held demanding the local governor resign and part of the phosphate revenues be returned to the region
Workers have stopped working, cut off the water, and seized equipment in demand that they be paid more. A demonstration was held demanding the local governor resign and part of the phosphate revenues be returned to the region
Masked men burned down a Sufi shrine and robbed the female employees of their jewelry
Ekbes called for a boycott of Tunisian media in response to the journalist strike
Journalists went on strike claiming that the Islamist-led government was working to constrain press freedom and control media groups
Protesters marched denouncing the persistent members of the old regime. They ended at a regional union office where they clashed with employees
Protesters gathered to denounce the Islamist-led government and political violence
Protesters surrounded two police posts and refused to leave in protest of state violence. Police fired tear gas to disperse the crowd which resulted in clashes
A hatchet-wielding assailant attacked a police officer as a group of policemen tried to break up a fight between illegal alchohol sellers and Salafists
Members of the security forces union wore red armbands for three days in protest against a suspected Islamist attack on a police officer
Radical Islamists raided two national guard posts, which led to clashes with security forces, because an Salafist was arrested. The Salafist is suspected of assaulting the security force chief
Tunisian secuirty forces protested the attacks on them and the lack of resources they receive to protect themselves
Salafists protested outside the justice ministry following the sweeping arrests of other Salafists. They claim they are being repressed and demand for the release of those detained
Protesters gathered in support of a dean accused of violence towards a vieled female student
A peaceful protest for jobs and government investment became violent when police forcefully dispersed the crowd and stone-throwing clashes developed. Protesters then began demanding that the governor step down and 14 jailed activists be released. Violent riots spread to nearby towns and protests began denouncing police violence.
A peaceful protest for jobs and government investment became violent when police forcefully dispersed the crowd and stone-throwing clashes developed. Protesters then began demanding that the governor step down and 14 jailed activists be released. Violent riots spread to nearby towns and protests began denouncing police violence.
A peaceful protest for jobs and government investment became violent when police forcefully dispersed the crowd and stone-throwing clashes developed. Protesters then began demanding that the governor step down and 14 jailed activists be released. Violent riots spread to nearby towns and protests began denouncing police violence.
A peaceful protest for jobs and government investment became violent when police forcefully dispersed the crowd and stone-throwing clashes developed. Protesters then began demanding that the governor step down and 14 jailed activists be released. Violent riots spread to nearby towns and protests began denouncing police violence.
A peaceful protest for jobs and government investment became violent when police forcefully dispersed the crowd and stone-throwing clashes developed. Protesters then began demanding that the governor step down and 14 jailed activists be released. Violent riots spread to nearby towns and protests began denouncing police violence.
Supporters of the Islamist rulers attacked a UGTT gethering marking the anniversary of the assassination of its founder and clashes between the two groups ensued.
UGTT regional branches and businesses closed due to increased tensions between the unions and Islamist party following the clashes in Siliana. Protesters also marched chanting slogans denouncing the Islamist party
UGTT regional branches and businesses closed due to increased tensions between the unions and Islamist party following the clashes in Siliana. Protesters also marched chanting slogans denouncing the Islamist party
UGTT regional branches and businesses closed due to increased tensions between the unions and Islamist party following the clashes in Siliana. Protesters also marched chanting slogans denouncing the Islamist party
UGTT regional branches and businesses closed due to increased tensions between the unions and Islamist party following the clashes in Siliana. Protesters also marched chanting slogans denouncing the Islamist party
Imams led protests calling for a purge of the UGTT and the implementation of Sharia law. The following day, Muslims marched to show support Ennahda
A policemen was shot when he approached four gunmen near an oil company
Protesters hurled rocks and demanded the fall of the government as the politicians spoke to the residents of Sidi Bouzid
Demonstrators attacked a hotel where members of Nidaa Tounes were commemorating the murder of one of their officials. The demonstrators held hostile banners and threw rocks at officials
A jobless teenager killed himself by clinging to an electric pylon at his bleak circumstances
Policemen searching for suspected Salafist arms caches came underfire and fired back.
Tunisians protested and rioted after the border was closed
Tunisians rioted after government closed down the Libyan border after flood of new violence has emerged
Tunisian opposition party protests killing of Chokri Belaid, leader, by Islamists. Blame is centered on the government
protesters demonstrate against the killing of Opposition figure
protesters demonstrate after the killing of opposition leader
Pro-Islamists protesters took to the streets to demonstrate against plans to reform the government
Pro-Islamists protesters took to the streets to demonstrate against plans to reform the government
Opposition protesters demonstrated the slow investigation behind Chokri Belaid's death
University Students protested the university barring them from filming a version of Harlem Shake. Islamists attacked protesting students which set off a small riot
University Students protested the university barring them from filming a version of Harlem Shake. Islamists attacked protesting students which set off a small riot
Anti-government protesters demonstrate against new Prime Minister Ali Larayedh
Man set himself on fire in protest to the economic conditions in Tunisia
protesters demanded the resignation of Tunisia's minister of women's affairs, accusing her of supporting a school where children were abused
Pro-Islamists protesters took to the streets to demonstrate against plans to reform the government
Salafists attempted to break free one of their own held by the police
Man set himself on fire in protest to the economic conditions in Tunisia
Terrorists kill 6 in clashes with security forces
Terrorists bomb Tunisian security forces
Police disperse Salafists as they tried to host a public prayer
Salafists and police battle in street riots
Salafists and police battle in street riots
Street Vendors riot over new law that would ban them from setting up their booths
FEMEN, a pro women group, disrobed to protest new laws
protesters demonstrated against the naked protest by FEMEN the previous day
Terrorists bomb Tunisian security forces
Two soldiers killed by roadside bomb
Islamist protesters demonstrate against the ouster of Morsi in Egypt
Protests over killing of opposition MP
Opposition leader MP was killed
Islamists ambush Tunisian Soldiers
Tunisian army attempts to force out terrorists
Ennahda stages a pro government rally
Opposition supporters demonstrate against the new coalition government
Opposition supporters demonstrate against the new coalition government
Tunisian Army bombed Terrorist location
Ennahda stages a pro government rally
Tunisian women protested for greater rights
NSF opposition forces demanded the resignation of the Conservative government
NSF opposition forces demanded the resignation of the Conservative government
Journalists strike in protest of government arrests of journalists
Militants attacked Tunisian police
Tunisian Army bombed Terrorist location
Security forces forced top Tunisian leaders to leave the funeral of fallen police in protest of the fight against Islamist Militants
Gunmen attack and kill 6 Tunisian police
Anti-government protesters demand the resignation of leading coalition
Suicide bomber blows himself up on Sousse Beach
Army engage with militants in armed conflict in sweeping operation
Protests turn to riots as demonstrators protest lack of jobs or local resources
Protests turn to riots as demonstrators protest lack of jobs or local resources
Paid thugs for Ennahda attacked the Popular Front headquarters
Bomb kills Tunisian officer
Trade Unions protest lack of resources
Tunisians mark the anniversary of the Arab Spring Protests by demonstrating slow economic growth in Tunisia
An ultra conservative Islamist group battles security forces.
Unemployed youths protest recruitment results and attack and burn a police post.
protesters attack the ruling party offices and call for regime change because of poor economic development and new taxes
protesters attack the ruling party offices and call for regime change because of poor economic development and new taxes
protesters attack the ruling party offices and call for regime change because of poor economic development and new taxes
Businesses and offices close to protest poor economic development.
Thieves and criminals attack a border post.
Riots break out after protests against taxes and a poor economy.
Riots break out after protests against taxes and a poor economy.
Riots break out after protests against taxes and a poor economy.
Demonstrators gather to mark the end of dictatorship in Tunisia in a pro-democracy march.
Judges and lawyers protest a draft constitution for limiting judicial independence.
Unemployed people try to break into a government building amid rumors jobs may be available at a private company.
secular constitutions.
During a raid, a terrorist responsible for the assassination of Chokri Belaid is killed.
protesters gather calling for Ben Jeddou to resign and for transparency about Chokri Belaid's assassination.
Security forces battle alleged terrorists during a raid.
Jihadists kill two people in a car at a checkpoint and two police.
protesters gather to oppose terrorism and the weekend murder of 4 people by jihadists.
protesters burn public buildings and confront policemen over three days after not getting hired by a company.
Gunmen who broke through a checkpoint seriously wound police officers.
Government forces kill three suspected jihadists in a raid.
People strike over the closure of the Libyan/Tunisian border where fuel is smuggled.
Supporters protest against rape when policemen are convicted of raping a woman.
Youths storm a workers' union for not supporting a general strike.
protesters call for the release of 16 men and for development.
Soldiers hit a landmine after exchanging fire with militants.
People protest the arrest of two bloggers over drug charges, accusing the government of limiting freedom of expression.
Two soldiers die when their vehicle hits a landmine.
al-Qaeda militants kill four police officers in an attack on the home of the interior minister.
Two jihadists are killed during an operation.
In two instances, roadside bombs wound security personnel.
Relatives demand the release of their family members, arrested for alleged connections with Ansar al-Sharia terrorism org.
Terrorists attack soldiers with machine guns and grenade launchers.
Terrorists ambush soldiers, killing two.
Terrorists fire on a helicopter carrying security personnel.
Militants fire on a military and police post, killing a soldier and wounding a civilian.
Militants fire on a military and police post, killing a soldier and wounding a civilian.
People protest the government's suspension of civil associations for alleged links with terrorism.
Police kill two women they mistake for members of an armed group.
Six masked gunmen attempt to assassinate a secular parliamentarian.
Relatives of a known militant protest and then attack a police station.
Soldiers kill two foreign militants in a shootout.
Police are accused of torturing a man who died in a coma after his arrest.
A policeman and security guard are killed in gunfights with alleged terrorists; police then kill 6 militants.
A policeman and security guard are killed in gunfights with alleged terrorists; police then kill 6 militants.
Gunmen attack a military bus, killing four soldiers.
Gunmen decapitate a National Guardsman
A soldier is killed when his vehicle hits a land mine.
Men armed with hunting rifles attack soldiers guarding ballot locations.
Youths protest and riot over election results - mainly in the south.
Youths protest and riot over election results - mainly in the south.
Youths protest and riot over election results - mainly in the south.
Youths protest and riot over election results - mainly in the south.
Suspected Islamic extremists slit the throat of a policeman while he was on his way home.
protesters interrupt revolution ceremony, asking compensation for family members who died in 2011 and started Arab Spring.
protesters interrupt revolution ceremony, asking compensation for family members who died in 2011 and started Arab Spring.
There have been at least a dozen attacks in Tunis & Sfax against sub-Saharan Africans after Tunisian soccer defeat by Equ. Guinea.
There have been at least a dozen attacks in Tunis & Sfax against sub-Saharan Africans after Tunisian soccer defeat by Equ. Guinea.
General strike expressing grievances/anger over govt crackdown on rampant smuggling. Police tear gassed youth protesting Wed.
Four National Guard members were killed in a pre-dawn attack by suspected Al-Qaeda-linked militants near the Algerian border.
Judges went on strike to protest a proposed legislative change they claim would undermine the independence of the judiciary.
Gunmen attacked Bardo National Museum, killing 22. Many foreign citizens killed. Security forces killed gunmen.
Tunisian soldier killed when vehicle hit landmine 'planted by terrorist elements'.
Security forces killed Algerian militant leader responsible for March 18 Tunis museum attack and other members of his cell.
Thousands march the streets of Tunisia in a protest against extremism. The president joined the march with foreign dignitaries.
Armed militants ambushed a Tunisian military patrol in the mountainous region near the border with Algeria, killing 5.
2 soldiers and 10 jihadists killed in clashes near Algerian border over two day period.
A Tunisian soldier opened fire on fellow troops at a military barracks killing seven people before he was himself killed.
Only 12 women answered Tunisian rights group's call to protest the repression of women by demonstrating in miniskirts.
An armed militia stormed into the Tunisian general consulate in Tripoli, Libya, taking 10 hostage.
3 policemen and 1 jihadist were killed when national guardsmen tried to ambush 2 armed men allegedly planning attacks.
1 Tunisian policeman was killed and four wounded in clashes with jihadists on the border with Algeria.
Gunman opened fire at a packed holiday resort, killing 39. 36 wounded.
Tunisian security forces killed five suspected jihadists in Gafsa region.
Security forces killed one suspected jihadist and arrested 16 others in a series of operations.
A suspected jihadist has been shot dead in western Tunisia near the Algerian border.
A woman was killed and a man wounded after soldiers opened fire on their car fearing they were armed.
Two soldiers were killed by a landmine in western Tunisia near the Algerian border.
A Tunisian policeman was shot dead Wednesday by two assailants on a motorbike in the coastal resort of Sousse.
Suspected militants opened fire on a Tunisian border patrol late Sunday night near the frontier with Algeria, killing 1 border guard.
Hundreds of Tunisians marched under heavy security to protest a law offering amnesty for those accused of corruption.
Unknown gunmen fired on Tunisian legislator.
Two soldiers killed in clashes after suspected Islamist militants fired on security forces.
An explosion targeting a bus carrying presidential guards Tuesday killed at least 12 officers .
Demonstrators protest West Germany's alleged involvement of a fire that destroyed a chemical plant.
Demonstrators protest Western intervention in Iraq invasion of Kuwait
Demonstrators protest and ransack embassies of all nations supporting UN embargo resolution.
Protesters block the roadways to protest the arrival on UN special envoy, Petrovsky, and UN sanctions.
Protesters rally against UN sanctions.
Protesters demonstrate on the sixth anniversary of the US air strike.
Protesters demonstrate against UN sanctions.
Demonstrators march on the anniversary of the US air raid on Libya.
Anti-American protesters demonstrate in response to US missile attack on Iraq's intelligence headquarters.
Military coup attempt against Qaddafi.
Protesters demonstrate almost daily against new UN sanctions and US imperialism.
Protesters demonstrate against UN sanctions and the United States.
Protesters demonstrate against government crackdown of suspected fundamentalists.
Muslim opposition members protest Gadhafi's anti-fundamentalism program.
Palestinian refugees expelled from Libya protest at the Egyptian border demanding Egypt allow them to enter.
Palestinian refugees expelled from Libya protest and stage hunger strikes, at the Egyptian border demanding Egypt allow them to enter.
Prison riot killed 16 guards and freed at least 400 prisoners.  Clashes with freed prisoners continued in Dirnah.
Prison riot killed 16 guards and freed at least 400 prisoners.  Clashes with freed prisoners continued in Dirnah.
Gunmen hijack an Egyptian airliner to a Libyan city over the Palestinian issues.
Suspected Islamists attack policemen guarding the Egyptian consulate.  Opposition militants are eventually arrested and killed in detention.
Demonstrations mark the 10th anniversay of the US air raid on Tripoli and protest UN sanctions.
Demonstrators protest Israel's campaign against Hezbollah in Lebanon and US support of the campaign.
Islamist gunmen kill seven policemen.
Islamist gunmen kill seven policemen.
Islamist gunmen kill seven policemen.
Political detainees protest poor prison conditions.
Soccer fans fight one another after soccer match in which one Libyan team beat another.
Islamic fundamentalist attack military base and the home of one of Qadhafi's female bodyguards.
Islamic fundamentalist attack military base and the home of one of Qadhafi's female bodyguards.
Libyan military forces clash with Islamic militants.
Palestinians trapped at the border of Egpyt and Lybia protest to demand the ability to return to their homes in Libya.
Palestinians trapped at the border of Egpyt and Lybia stage a hunger strike to demand the ability to return to their homes in Libya.
Demonstrators show support for Iraq over UN weapons inspections.
Members of the PKK celbrate the 14th anniversary of the insurrection against Ankara.
PKK members parade in support of Gadhafi on the anniversary of the coup that brought him to power.
Demonstrators protest US-British raids on Iraq.
Riots between African workers and Libyan workers, cause unknown.
Libyans protest at UN building and British embassy demanding the release of man convicted in Lockerbie trial.
Protesters march to show support for the Palestinians.
Protesters march to show support for the Palestinians.
Families of a group of children infected with the HIV by Bulgarian medics protest the arrival of Bulgaria's foreign minister.
Protesters demonstrate outside Kuwait's embassy in opposition to US and British troops in Kuwait.
Protesters demonstrate outside the Saudi embassy in reaction to a live television argument between Qadhafi and Crown Prince Abdullah.
Protesters demonstrate against US invasion of Iraq.
Soccer fans protest the decision of Saadi Gadhafi to join an Italian soccer team.
Protesters march in response to Israeli policy of targeting Hamas officials and the killing of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin.
Protesters demonstrate against US military offensives in Iraq.
People protest the Fallujah operation and US-led occupation in Iraq.
Families of children infected with the HIV virus protest Bulgarian diplomats who defend the nurses accused.
Qadhafi supporters gather to celebrate the 36th anniversary of the coup that put Qadhafi in power.
Protests against Pres. Bush's demand for the release of 5 nurses and 1 doctor accused of infecting children with the HIV virus.
Families of children infected with the HIV virus protest outside court proceedings involving those accused, protest turned violent when the judge announced a postponement of the trial.
Families of children infected with HIV protest a judicial decision to overturn the death sentences of the accused nurses and doctor.
Political prisoners stage a hunger-strike over failure of the government to release them as promised.
Muslims violently protest Italian Minister Calderoli's decision to wear at t-shrit with caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad.
Families of HIV infected children demonstrate outside the criminal court hearing the case of five nurses and o0ne doctor accused of infecting the children.
Prisoners protest trial delays.
Families of HIV infected children demonstrate to show support for the criminal court issuing the death penalty to the nurses and doctor accused of infecting the children.
Families of HIV infected children rally  calling for death sentences of 5 nurses and one doctor to be upheld.
Libyans protest alleged mistreatment of Kadhafi's son during his arrest in Switzerland.
2011 Libyan uprising.  Spontaneous uprising over food prices, jobs, and democracy.
Libyan Civil War.  Rebels advance from Benghazi to overthrow Qaddafi
1500 protesters call for the end of Gadhafi's regime.
Over 10,000 protesters pour into the streets, demanding that Kadhafi surrender power.
Protests are reported in the capital as NATO airstrikes continue.
Two days of anti-regime protests are reported.
Rival rebel factions clash.
Large anti-Khadafi protests are reported on the day that the rebels enter Tripoli.
Clash between rebel militias.
Hundreds of Berbers march to pressure the government for representation.
Rebel factions clash after Rojban fighters from the west demand the release of a comrade held in a security services building.
Dozens of protesters demand that militia fighters pull out of the capital.
Hundreds of residents and police protest against rebel militias camped out in the capital.
Gunmen try to assassinate the head of Libya's new army, triggering hours of gun battles.
5000 demonstrators protest to demand that the head of the NTC resign, complaining of a lack of transparency and willingness to forgive Khadafi fighters.  The protests are countered by NTC rallies.
People in Khadafi's home town protest against the town's marginalization in the 'New Libya.'
As many as four thousand students of the University of Ghar Yunis and former rebels gathered in Benghazi to protest the transitional government's lack of transparency. Protests led to the resignation of the National Transitional Council deputy. The NTC headquarters were also attacked by protesters.
Mistrata militiamen attacked members of the Al-Zawiyah militia in Tripoli, resulting in the death of four militants and the wounding of some five others. The Mistrata militants were allegedly attempting to rescue a comrade detained by the Al-Zawiyah militia.
Responding to the stabbing of a fellow townsmen, The Martyrs Brigade of Gharyan  entered Asbi'a and were  confronted by the Asbi'a's militia . The ensuing conflict lasted three days and claimed the lives of four. An estimated fifty individuals were injured.
Ten Libyan youths protested in the lobby of a Tripoli hotel where Egyptian ruler Hussein Tantawin was speaking. The demonstraters demanded the return of former Khadafi loyalists in Egypt and expressed support for fellow revolutionaries in Egypt.
Over one hundred armed Khadafi loyalists known as Brigade 93 attacked Bani Walid. Four were killed and many more injured.
As members of the Syrian National Council took control of the Syrian embassy in Tripoli, dozens of suppoters gathered outside to protest the rule of Bashar al-Assad. The following day, roughly two hundred Syrians broke into the Russian embassy and raised the Syrian rebel flag to protest Russia's UN vetoes.
After a small initial conflict, extened violence broke out between the Zwai and Tobu. Heavy weapson were used and over one hunder people were killed, including numerous civilians
In an effort to discourage a pro-Khadafi resurgence, Libya unitied militia forces held a military parade through Tripoli.
Thousands of Libyan gathered in Benghazi's Tahrir Square to celebrate the anniversary of the revolt that overthrew Khadafi.
Members of the Saraya Swehli militia kidnapped two British journalists and their three Libyan companions.
Angry Salafist protesters desecrated WWII graves in Benghazi in response to U.S. troops in Afghanistan burning the Koran.
Thousands protested in Benghazi and Tripoli at the prospect of a federal system of governance. One individual was killed as protesters set fire to a Benghazi market.
Thousands protested in Benghazi and Tripoli at the prospect of a federal system of governance. One individual was killed as protesters set fire to a Benghazi market.
Following a speech by pro-federalist leader Ahmed Zubeir Senussi, two thousand federalist supporters clashed with anti-federalists. One individual was killed in the conflict and five others were injured.
Arab tribesmen clashed with Tabu  in Sabha. The ethnically fueled conflict produced around one hundred and sixty-three deaths and wounded hundreds others.
Around thirty former rebels belonging to the Katibat al-Awfiya militia held a sit-in protest at Benghazi's airport. The demonstrators demanded government compensation for their servince in the revolt.
The militia Ragdalein captured men from Zwara because of alleged looting and abuses during the previous year's revolt. Zwara's forces attacked in response and seventeen individuals were killed and dozens others wounded.
The militia Ragdalein captured men from Zwara because of alleged looting and abuses during the previous year's revolt. Zwara's forces attacked in response and seventeen individuals were killed and dozens others wounded.
Five Tunisians were captured in the Tunisian-Libyan and held hostage for two days.
Former rebels held small demonstrations in front of the interim government building in Tripoli and constructed several blockades throughout the city. The militiamen were angered by the government's decision to suspend compensation to rebels. The government's headquarters were fired upon, but no injuries were reported.
A convoy of UN officials travelling in Benghazi was attacked with a hand grenade. No injuries occurred and the assailant remained unidentified.
Armed Libyans detained Tunisian workers and demanded freedom for a small group of Libyans held in Tunisia.
Elements of the national army attacked members of the Tobu in Kufra. The conflict produced twelve deaths and many more deaths.
Prisoners in Benghazi made a violent attempt at escape, but were stopped by guards. Three guards and three prisoners were killed.
Unknown individuals damaged a courthouse in Benghazi using explosive devices. The attack wounded three individuals.
A demonstration of dozens of former rebels ended peacefully when leader of the National Transitional Council Abdel Jalil came out of the NTC headquarters and placated the crowd.
Police killed two militiamen in Tripoli after the former revolutionaries refused to cede control of territory in the capital.
Militiamen, some from Yefran, surrounded the government headquarters in Tripoli and protested the government's refusal to compensate former rebels as well as its failure provide medical care to the wounded. The protesters then turned violent and one individual was killed and four injured in the subsequent fray.
A group of armed individuals killed Khaled Abu Saleh outside of Ubari. Saleh had just registered in an upcoming General National Congress election.
A group of Tuareg tribesmen attacked the town of Ghadames in response to their expulsion from Ghadames and several other communities. Six Tuaregs and one citizen of Ghadames were killed during the attack.
Assailants hit the International Committiee of the Red Cross's office in Benghazi with an RPG. No casualties occurred.
Unknown individuals struck the Benghazi branch of Sahara Bank with a rocket, causing some damage, but no injuries.
Tarhouna militiamen forcefully seized Tripoli's airport in response to their leader's arrest. Government forces retook the airport several hours later.
Assailants struck the U.S. diplomatic mission in Benghazi with a bomb. Minimal damage was incurred and no one was wounded.
Dozens of activists, including women, held a protest in Benghazi to criticize other demonstrators for bringing weapons to a rally in support of Sharia law. The activists successfully dispered the Sharia rally.
Over three hundred heavily armed men protested in Benghazi's Tahrir Square just before Libya's assembly election. The demonstrators demanded Libya be ruled under Sharia law.
Members of the Tobu minority attacked a government checkpoint. The Libya Shield Brigade, an element of the national army, retaliated with an assault on Kufra. Twenty Tobu and three soldiers were killed.
Unknown assailants attacked a British diplomatic convoy in Benghazi with a RPG. Two British bodyguards were injured in the attack.
Zintan rebels attacked members of the el-Manshisha, a rival tribe that did not participate in the anti-Gadhafi uprising. The attack was a response to the shooting of a Zintan rebel by alleged el-Manshisha members. Twelve individuals were killed and eighty-nine wounded in the retaliation.
Zintan rebels attacked members of the el-Manshisha, a rival tribe that did not participate in the anti-Gadhafi uprising. The attack was a response to the shooting of a Zintan rebel by alleged el-Manshisha members. Twelve individuals were killed and eighty-nine wounded in the retaliation.
Zintan rebels attacked members of the el-Manshisha, a rival tribe that did not participate in the anti-Gadhafi uprising. The attack was a response to the shooting of a Zintan rebel by alleged el-Manshisha members. Twelve individuals were killed and eighty-nine wounded in the retaliation.
The International Commission of the Red Cross's Misrata office was hit by an explosive device that injured one individual. The source and purpose of the attack were unknown.
In a recurring conflict, fighting broke out between members of the Tobu and Zwai tribes in Kufra. Government militia forces were attacked when they attempted to intervene. One individual was killed and several injured.
In response to widespread violence and insecurity, dozens of Libyans protested in Benghazi. The demonstrators requested  the government control the militias and reinstate order.
Assailants fired on a security patrol traveling in Sabha, killing two and wounding ten.
Unidentified individuals destroyed the headstones of WWII Allied soldiers in Benghazi. The graves were believed to be targeted for religious reasons.
Armed members of the Partisans of Shariah seized the Tunisian consulate in Benghazi, but eventually withdrew peacefully.
In Derna, unknown individuals killed former Khadafi officers and other individuals in a series of killings that extended over months.
In Kufra, Tobu tribesmen clashed with members of the Zwai tribe. The Libya Shield Brigade attempted to stop the fighting, but was drawn into the conflict. Around thrity-two individuals, including women and children, were killed and many more wounded.
Rioters under the nominal leadership of Abdeljawad al-Badin attacked the offices of the electoral commission in Benghazi ahead of national assembly elections. The perpetrators were angered by the government's dismissal of their demands for a federal system.
Abdel-Hakim Belhaj, leader of the Al-Watan party, spoke to hundreds about the need for Sharia in Libya's emerging democracy. The rally in Tripoli occurred a week before national elections.
Supporters of federalism attempted to attack a warehouse containing national election ballots but were peacefully stopped by residents of Ajdabiya. The following day, the ballots were burnt.
The Alliance for National Forces led a parade of cars through Tripoli to advocate their party in the upcoming election.
Members of the Justice and Construction Party held a march through Tripoli in anticipation of upcoming elections.
Wadi Ahmar shut down oil facilities in Al-Sedra, Haruj, Zuwaytina, Brega and Al-Hariga. The group's efforts were an attempt to make the government divide legislative seats on the basis of region and not demographics.
Wadi Ahmar shut down oil facilities in Al-Sedra, Haruj, Zuwaytina, Brega and Al-Hariga. The group's efforts were an attempt to make the government divide legislative seats on the basis of region and not demographics.
Wadi Ahmar shut down oil facilities in Al-Sedra, Haruj, Zuwaytina, Brega and Al-Hariga. The group's efforts were an attempt to make the government divide legislative seats on the basis of region and not demographics.
Wadi Ahmar shut down oil facilities in Al-Sedra, Haruj, Zuwaytina, Brega and Al-Hariga. The group's efforts were an attempt to make the government divide legislative seats on the basis of region and not demographics.
Wadi Ahmar shut down oil facilities in Al-Sedra, Haruj, Zuwaytina, Brega and Al-Hariga. The group's efforts were an attempt to make the government divide legislative seats on the basis of region and not demographics.
Unidentified attackers fired on a helicopter transporting election officials, killing one. The incident occurred near the edge of Benghazi.
Unknown individuals fired two rockets at the Benghazi Medical Centre, failing to cause any casualities or damage.
Unidentified gunmen attacked polling stations in several locations throughout Libya. In Ajdabiya, one individual was killed and two injured.
Unidentified gunmen attacked polling stations in several locations throughout Libya. In Ajdabiya, one individual was killed and two injured.
Unidentified gunmen attacked polling stations in several locations throughout Libya. In Ajdabiya, one individual was killed and two injured.
Unidentified gunmen attacked polling stations in several locations throughout Libya. In Ajdabiya, one individual was killed and two injured.
In Benghazi, hundreds of protesters burned ballots and asked the government to provide greater democracy.
Hundreds of Libyans gathered in Tripoli and Benghazi to celebrate the country's first post-Gadhafi election. In Benghazi, military members participated in the demonstration, but once they left protester became violent and destroyed property.
Hundreds of Libyans gathered in Tripoli and Benghazi to celebrate the country's first post-Gadhafi election. In Benghazi, military members participated in the demonstration, but once they left protester became violent and destroyed property.
Two Misrata journalists were captured in Bani Walid, a community known for its former allegiance to Khadafi.
Khadafi loyalists kidnapped Omran Ben Shaaban, the man responsible for Khadafi's capture, and three of his associates. Shaaban was shot while trying to escape. Later released, he died of the injuries received during his captivity.
One person was wounded in Tripoli during a fight over market space. The conflict featured gunfire and a car bomb.
Unknown individuals attacked the residence of Red Cross workers in Misrata with heavy weaponry.
In Al-Aziziya, a unit of the interior ministry brigade raided the hideout of individuals tied to several bomb plots. Three suspects were killed and five security officers wounded.
Derna's city security chief was killed by unknown individuals.
Khadafi loyalists detonated two bombs in Tripoli, targeting a military academy and an office of the interior ministry. Two individuals were killed and four injured in the attacks.
Security forces attacked Katibat al-Awfiya, a pro-Khadafi militia, near Tarhuna. One individual was killed, eight injured, and thirteen arrested. Additionally, over one hundred tanks and other heavy weaponry were seized.
Two rival tribes in Zliten attacked each other with light and heavy weaponry in an attempt to settle a long-standing dispute. Two individuals were killed.
Islamic fundamentalists destroyed Sufi shrines in Tripoli, Misrata, and Zliten because they viewed the idea of worhipping tombs as sacrilegious.
Islamic fundamentalists destroyed Sufi shrines in Tripoli, Misrata, and Zliten because they viewed the idea of worhipping tombs as sacrilegious.
Islamic fundamentalists destroyed Sufi shrines in Tripoli, Misrata, and Zliten because they viewed the idea of worhipping tombs as sacrilegious.
Dozens of Libyans protested in Tripoli in response to the government's inability to deal with religious violence.
Islamic radicals, long abused under Khadafi, planted and detonated a bomb in the car of colonel of the former regime. The colonel was killed and his assistant wounded.
Muslim fundamentalists attempted  to destroy a shrine in Rajma, but were stopped by local militia and national security forces. Three individuals were killed and many others wounded.
Islamic terrorists laid seige to the United States consulate in Benghazi, killing U.S. Ambassador Christopher Stevens and three other diplomats. Several others were wounded. The attack was conducted by around fifty militants armed with grenades and guns.
Members of Ansar al-Sharia beat and stabbed Catholic nuns and  a priest in Derna.
Hundreds of protesters gathered in Tripoli and Benghazi to condem the terrorist attack against the U.S. consolate in Benghazi days earlier.
Hundreds of protesters gathered in Tripoli and Benghazi to condem the terrorist attack against the U.S. consolate in Benghazi days earlier.
Derna residents held a lengthy sit-in protest outside the Sahaba Mosque and called for the disbanding of Ansar al-Sharia, a militant group responsible for recent violence.
About two hundred individuals belonging to the Ansar al-Shariah militia marched through Benghazi to express their faith in Muhammad and anger over an anti-Muslim film.
Air traffic controllers at Libya's international airports in Tripoli and Benghazi went on strike to demand better salaries and equipment.
Air traffic controllers at Libya's international airports in Tripoli and Benghazi went on strike to demand better salaries and equipment.
Khadafi loyalists entered into an extended conflict with pro-government militia in Barek al-Shati. Ninteen individuals were killed and thirty militiamen were captured.
 march organized by Mohammed Abujanah and others to protest the continued presence of militias. Activists attempted to violently oust Ansar al-Sharia and other Islamist militias from their bases. Eleven individuals, including security forces, were killed and about seventy injured. The city residents were particularly angered by Ansar al-Sharia's religious fanatacism and possible link to Ambassador Chris Steven's death.
In Benghazi, hundreds of members of Ansar al-Sharia protested the creation of anti-Muslim film by an amatuer U.S. film producer and an offensive French cartoon. The protesters also criticized U.S. President Barack Obama while praising God.
The national army forcefully removed militias in Tripoli still lingering from anti-Khadafi uprising.
Over two hundred Salafist protesters demanded the return of extremist militia Ansar al-Sharia to Benghazi. The protesters grew violent and attacked security forces with grenades and burned cars.
Around two hundred protesters marched in Tripoli, asking the government to disband militias and create a more centralized security force.
Khadafi loyalists from Bani Walid clashed with militiamen from Misrata in the valley of Mardun, just outside of the loyalists' town. Three militiamen were wounded.
Muslim extremists attacked four policeman at a checkpoint in Susa. Three of the officers were killed and the last was left in critical condition.
Over one hundred demonstrators from Zawiyah barged into the national assembly to complain that no one from their city had been selected for the PM's cabinet.
Around one thousand demonstrators gathered outside the national assembly building in Tripoli, requesting the government peacefully end the military seige of Bani Walid.
The Libyan Shield and militia from Misrata laid seige to Bani Walid, believed to be one of the last strongholds of Khadafi loyalists. Thirty individuals were killed and over two hundred were wounded.
In Benghazi, demonstrators looted a private television station after it reported unsubstantiated claims that the government had captured key Khadafi figures.
Armed men attacked the barracks of defense ministry forces in Tripoli. No casualties were reported.
Around two hundred demonstrators gathered outside the national assembly building in Tripoli to protest the seige of Bani Walid. Security forces physically restrained and beat protesters. The demonstration was finally dispersed when government forces fired warning shots into the air.
Hundreds of Libyans gathered in Tripoli and Benghazi to celebrate one year since the country's liberation from the Khadafi regime.
Hundreds of Libyans gathered in Tripoli and Benghazi to celebrate one year since the country's liberation from the Khadafi regime.
About one hundred protesters entered the legislature's building in Tripoli during a vote on the prime minister's cabinet. Protests flared up again in following days as a larger crowd of some two hundred armed demonstrators held a sit-in.
Unknown assailants killed a former Khadafi official in Derna.
Unidentified gunmen killed Muslim cleric Sheikh Abdullah al-Fussay outside a Benghazi mosque.
Over one thousand demonstrators in Benghazi called on the government to adopt a federal system of governance.
Around one hundred and fifty former rebels held a sit-in protest at an oil installation in Zawiya. The men demanded medical care for injuries they sustained during the uprising.
Five were wounded as members of rival militias in Tripoli fought for several hours.
Two unidentified individuals detonated a bomb outside a police station in Benghazi, destroying a car and slightly wounding four officers.
An unknown individual struck a police vehicle with an explosive device. In the ensuing gun battle, one officer was critically wounded and another slightly injured.
Unknown individuals killed former colonel Abdelkarim Mahfud in Benghazi. The colonel was known for supporting the 2011 rebellion.
Unidentified individuals planted bomb in the car of former Khadafi officer Hussam al-Raaid. The explosive device wounded the officer upon detonation.
Three unidentified gunmen fired on Benghazi security chief Fraj al-Dersi, fatally wounding him.
Unknown inidividuals detonated a bomb outside the Al-Fwihet police station in Benghazi. Four officers were were wounded by the blast.
Unidentified gunmen fired on a UN convoy traveling in Khoms. There were no casualties.
Radical Islamists attacked several police stations in Benghazi with guns and RPGs in what appeared to be an attempt to free a murder suspect. Four policemen were killed and three wounded.
During the attempted arrest of murder suspect in Bani Walid, two soldiers were gunned down by unidentified attackers.
Militiamen in Tripoli protested a military tribunal investigating the death of a military chief by establishing several road blocks.
Over one hundred demonstrators gathered at an oil terminal in Zueitina. The demonstrators demanded jobs and healthcare.
Around two thousand people protested in Benghazi and demanded the government disband all militias.
Two unidentified individuals struck a Coptic church in Dafniya with an explosive device, killing two Egyptians and wounding two others.
A demonstration demanding the release of arrested suspects became violent when Islamists opened fire on the Benghazi police headquarters. Four individuals, including a police officer, were killed and nine others were wounded.
Unknown individuals detonated a bomb outside the public prosecutor's office in Benghazi. The explosion caused damage, but no casualties.
The acting head of the criminal investigations department in Benghazi was kidnapped at gunpoint by bearded men who stopped him at a traffic light
A small number of demonstrators, most of them police officers, gathered to call for the release of kidnapped Lt. Col. Abdel-Salam al-Mahdawi
Mohammed Megaryef experienced an assassination attempt when the hotel he was staying at came under sniper fire and explosions
Clashes broke out between Toubou and Zwai tribesmen and four Toubou tribesmen were killed by Libyan army forces after they intervened in the clashes
Militants opened fire on the car of the Italian consul
Two policemen were wounded when an improvised bomb was thrown under their patrol car
A bomb was planted in the car of Sergeant Salah Miftah Wizry and went off when he was on the way home, killing him
A clash between military units erupted after after a former deputy defence minister in charge of the national guard refused a government decision to quit
A Muslim Brotherhood official and member of the local council was shot dead after he left a mosque by gunmen
A crew of journalists was beaten up at parliament by plain clothes guards of the General National Congress
Thousands of protesters demanded a greater decentralization of power
Gunmen attacked an Egyptian Coptic church and assaulted two priests
Ex-rebels occupyied the national assembly to demand aid for injuries sustained during the revolution, and some of the protesters were armed and threw a grenade
Protesters demanding the adoption of a bill banning Kadhafi associates from power blocked MPs from leaving a meeting room, with the car of the General National Congress speaker coming under fire as assembly members left and an assembly member was caught and beaten up as he tried to flee
Dozens of militiamen, angry about the editorial policies of Alassema TV, stormed the headquarters of the network, looting and smashing equipment and abducting staffers
Assailants angry about a protest by Christians in front of the Libyan embassy torched a church
About 200 former rebel fighters besieged the prime minister's office, demanding that he resign
Gunmen posing as security personnel kidnapped a top aide of Prime Minister Ali Zeidan
An armed group in control of a prison stormed the justice ministry after the militia was ordered to cede control of the jail to the authorities
Armed men broke into a hospital unit and shot dead a man and a second man, also being treated, disappeared in a revenge attack for the death of a family member
Seventeen pro-Kadhafi fighters attacked a police post, seizing vehicles and weapons and killing a police guard, with two fighter killed in the attack
Attackers ambushed the chief of the Partisans of Islamic Law group, and one person traveling with him was wounded
Gunmen ambushed a police convoy transporting detainees to a jail, killing one prisoner, injuring several and kidnapping one
A car bomb attack on the French embassy wounded two guards and a civilian and caused extensive damage
Armed men attacked the headquarters of the pro-government group Uqba ibn Nafi, killing one
An explosion occurred at Barka police station, destroying the facade
200 armed men blocked access to the Foreign Ministry and held it under siege and also briefly occupied the finance ministry and surrounded the justice ministry to demand that the foreign ministry hire former fighters who helped overthrow Gadhafi, charged that the ministry is not paying them their salaries, and demanded the removal of Gadhafi-era officials from the TV station
Police officers, firing their guns in the air, stormed the interior ministry demanding higher wages and promotions twice over a period of two days
About 100 prisoners escaped from a prison after sacking the facility
Hundreds of supporters of the Political Isolation Law gathered in Martyrs Square before marching on Congress
Clashes raged as tribes clashed with heavy weapons after an argument between two men
Clashes raged as tribes clashed with heavy weapons after an argument between two men
An explosive device was thrown at Al-Baraka police station, destroying what remained of the building after a previous bombing
Activists were attacked while in a meeting at a hotel to organize protests
Opponents of the sieges of various government ministries held protests, waving signs calling for the respect of public institutions and denouncing the use of weapons and on the second day of protest came under fire from armed groups
Protesters placed images of those killed in Libya's war on coffins and laid them outside parliament, a message that Gadhafi-era officials were not welcome in government
Residents around the foreign ministry organised a protest in front of the building against the presence of weapons in their area and against the foreign and justice ministries
Bomb attacks targeted two police stations, causing extensive damage
Hundreds of activists protested to denounce the use of force by militias and and decrying political maneuverings by the Muslim Brotherhood, and militiamen descended on the Tripoli protest, kicking and beating protesters and seizing several
Hundreds of activists protested to denounce the use of force by militias and and decrying political maneuverings by the Muslim Brotherhood, and militiamen descended on the Tripoli protest, kicking and beating protesters and seizing several
Hundreds of activists protested to denounce the use of force by militias and and decrying political maneuverings by the Muslim Brotherhood, and militiamen descended on the Tripoli protest, kicking and beating protesters and seizing several
The Al-Gwarcha and Al-Uruba police stations were bombed, causing extensive damage
Protests erupted after a car bomb attack in a civilian area
Protests erupted after a car bomb attack in a civilian area
Gunmen attacked and set fire to a police station to avenge the death of a colleague killed in a previous attack on the station
An explosion inside a school caused damage but no injuries
A bomb was thrown from a car at an army checkpoint, injuring a soldier
A handmade bomb exploded outside the Greek embassy, but no injuries occurred
Armed men attacked the Mellitah gas complex, stealing weapons and military vehicles
A soldier was wounded in a raid against an armed group in which 220 anti-tank mines as well as equipment for manufacturing explosives were seized
Armed men in a car threw a bomb at a security patrol, killing two and injuring several
Armed militiamen blocked a main road leading to the airport in a protest to demand the government to free their commander
A fight between two men from al-Shourafa and Tabu tribes escalated to clashes between members of the two rival tribes, with five people killed
Dozens of people protested to demand that the Shield of Libya brigade submit to the full authority of Libya's security forces, and the protest was infiltrated by armed men, who opened fire on the building and threw explosives, killing at least 31
Demonstrations were held at the terminals at Libyan oil fields in Tobruk, Zueitina and Ubari
Demonstrations were held at the terminals at Libyan oil fields in Tobruk, Zueitina and Ubari
Demonstrations were held at the terminals at Libyan oil fields in Tobruk, Zueitina and Ubari
A car belonging to the Italian embassy was bombed, and a bystander was injured
An attacker hurled a grenade at the Libya Al-Hurra TV station and someone working at the station was injured
An army brigade came under attack by gunmen, and an army colonel was killed in the attack as well as three assailants
Hundreds of armed men forced a brigade of former rebel fighters from their base and fired a rocket-propelled grenade at a wall of the rebel fighter barracks, and the group later attacked several other governmental targets, with six Libyan soldiers and three armed attackers killed
Gunmen shot dead appeal court judge Mohammed Ibrahim Houidi as he left the appeals court
A German engineer and his driver were wounded when unidentified gunmen fired on their car
Gunmen killed six soldiers at a checkpoint
A group of gunmen who had been guarding oil facilities attacked the headquarters of the petrol installations guard because they wanted their jobs back, and a brigade of ex-rebels intervened in the fighting, and five people were killed
An army officer, Lieutenant Colonel Jemaa al-Misrati, was killed by a car bomb
Fighting erupted when gunmen tried to free comrades seized by ex-rebels and five people were killed in the fighting and ninety-seven wounded
Armed militiamen killed two soldiers when they stormed the The Yarmouk military base in a revenge attack for a crackdown by the military on militias
Two people were killed and seventeen wounded when three cars bombs exploded at roughly half-hour intervals
Gunmen attacked Libya's interior ministry building, forcing its closure
A car blew up near a special forces patrol, wounding two soldiers
France's honorary consul in Benghazi, Jean Dufriche, escaped unharmed after gunmen fired on his car, with at least 10 bullets hitting the car
Hundreds of demonstrators gathered to demand the implementation of a General National Congress order for militias to withdraw from the city
Gunmen in a vehicle shot and killed a commander of a Libyan air force brigade
Gunmen abducted and killed a senior Libyan air force officer
A bomb exploded at a courthouse complex, wounding a soldier
A bomb was thrown at a police station, and three detainees were wounded
A rocket-propelled grenade struck an apartment building next to a luxury hotel, but no one was injured
Attackers fired an RPG at the UAE embassy, and then opened fire on the UAE ambassador's house, causing minor damage
Three security members were killed when gunmen opened fire on them
Gunmen in a grey sedan shot and killed activist Abdul Salam al-Musmari on his way home
Thousands of people protested against the Party of Justice and Construction and the Alliance of National Force party, accusing the Brotherhood of being behind killings that have targeted dozens of officers and youths stormed and ransacked the buildings housing the PJC
Thousands of people protested against the Party of Justice and Construction and the Alliance of National Force party, accusing the Brotherhood of being behind killings that have targeted dozens of officers and youths stormed and ransacked the buildings housing the PJC
Over 1,000 inmates escaped during a riot at al-Kweifiya prison that erupted after security forces opened fire on three detainees who tried to escape the facility, and 18 escapees were later arrested
Two suitcase bombs went off near a courthouse, wounding between 13 and 43 people and causing damage
A car bomb exploded in an attempt to kill a senior Naval officer, and the officer was wounded
Clashes between the Libyan army and an armed group killed two people and wounded four
A car bomb wounded a former police sergeant and critically injured his son
Colonel Mabrouk al-Obeidi was seriously wounded by a bomb that was placed in his car
Gunmen shot and killed army Colonel Noueisri al-Adnen
Unknown attackers shot and killed a soldier
Workers forced the closure of oil shipping terminals in a protest strike over demands for back pay and equipment to secure their posts and the protesters also demanded greater rights for the Al-Magharba tribe
Workers forced the closure of oil shipping terminals in a protest strike over demands for back pay and equipment to secure their posts and the protesters also demanded greater rights for the Al-Magharba tribe
Workers forced the closure of oil shipping terminals in a protest strike over demands for back pay and equipment to secure their posts and the protesters also demanded greater rights for the Al-Magharba tribe
Workers forced the closure of oil shipping terminals in a protest strike over demands for back pay and equipment to secure their posts and the protesters also demanded greater rights for the Al-Magharba tribe
Gunmen attacked a police vehicle that was transporting prisoners, seriously wounding two guards
An explosive device was detonated outside the Ras Ubeid police station, wounding five people and damaging the building and nearby houses
Colonel Faouzi al-Oujli was seriously injured when an explosive device that was placed in his car went off
Two individuals on board a vehicle opened fire on a special forces unit and were arrested after a short chase
Armed men stormed a military barracks and looted equipment
A bomb exploded under a car, killing the driver in an attack that is thought to be a settling of scores
Gunmen shot and killed Libyan doctor Azzedine Koussos, host of a television show on human development
Armed men attacked the fairground after a fight with security guards, randomly shooting people, killing between one and three people and injuring several others
The director of Libya Al-Ahrar television's Benghazi office was shot at several times when she was on the way to her office
A colonel escaped a bomb attack after discovering the device placed under his car, and as he ran away from the car the bomb exploded, injuring him
Berbers demonstrating outside the General National Congress to demand that their language, ethnicity and culture be recognized in the future constitution broke into the chamber, ransacking furniture and slinging documents
Dozens of people protested outside the Egyptian consulate against a deadly police crackdown on supporters of Egypt's ousted Islamist president Mohamed Morsi and unknown assailants in a vehicle threw an explosive device at the Egyptian consulate while the protest was going on
A former judge was shot and killed by gunmen in a car as he left a mosque in an apparent revenge attack for his work as a judge
Armed members of the Wershifana tribe attacked a health centre near the town killing two people and kidnapping another person, and this led to clashes betwee the armed Wershifana tribe and townspeople in Zawiya
Gunmen closed three oil pipelines to demand money and vehicles
Gunmen attacked the convoy of the daughter of former spy chief Abdullah Senussi and kidnapped her as she left jail
Dozens of people protested against Prime Minister Zidan's government
Police colonel Salem al-Orfi was killed when his car exploded either due to a bomb or rocket fire
A car bomb exploded outside a building that once housed the US consulate, damaging the building and also damaging the Central Bank building
Armed men stormed a post office, taking employees hostage as part of a plan to cut off mail to the city of Sabha in retaliation for a rival tribe from Sabha cutting off the water supply to Tripoli for a week
Two security service members were ambushed by gunmen, one was killed and the other was injured
Bombers hit an air force vehicle, but no one was injured
Bombers hit the car of lawyer Jibril al-Maksabi, but he was not injured
Al-Hawari hospital was hit by a bomb, but no one was hurt
A police officer was killed by a bomb placed on his car
Several dozen relatives of victims of the 1996 Abu Slim jail massacre staged a protest outside court while Senussi was on trial for crimes committed during the 2011 conflict
Berbers cut off a gas pipeline to protest their marginalisation in the future constitution and kept the pipeline closed until 12/5
Air force Lieutenant Colonel Ali al-Daghani was killed when an explosive device that was placed in his car exploded near a market
Police officer Nejib Bel Hacen al-Zwei was killed when a homemade bomb exploded in his car
Police officer Abdelkader al-Maadani was gunned down outside his home
Gunmen fired at navy Captain Saleh al-Houdheiry, killing him and his son
Dozens of angry protesters tried to storm Russia's embassy and rioted after reports surfaced that a Russian woman had killed a Libyan army officer, with two killed in the rioting
Gunmen attacked a Libyan military post, killing 15 soldiers and wounding another 5
Several dozen members of Ansar al-Shariah protested, denouncing the U.S. abduction of militant al-Libi and criticizing the government for failing to protect him from the United States
Dozens of unarmed Libyan soldiers occupied the prime minister's office to demand unpaid wages
A boat carrying about 400 Syrian refugees was fired on by Libyan militiamen after it left the port of Zwara; the militiamen followed the boat at sea for 4-5 hours and then began opening fire on the boat; several people were killed and the firing caused the vessel to take on water and sink
The Prime Minister of Libya was kidnapped by about 150 gunmen from two different organizations that were affiliated with the government before being rescued by militiamen who traded gunfire with the captors
A car bomb went off in front of the Swedish and Finnish consulates, causing serious damage but no casualties
Islamic hard-liners held marches, denouncing a raid by U.S. special forces that snatched a Libyan al-Qaeda suspect from Tripoli and criticizing the Libyan government
Gunmen opened fire on Abdelfattah al-Ryani, an air force officer, killing him
Abdessalam al-Dursi, a colonel in a police anti-drugs unit, was seriously wounded when a bomb planted in his car went off
Al-Ahly club's coach Hossam el-Badry was driving home after a game when three men in another car opened fire on him, but he escaped the attack uninjured
Gumen shot and killed regional military police chief Colonel Mustapha al-Barghath outside his home
Members of the Braghtha tribe fired rocket-propelled grenades at the home of a former rebel they believed was behind the killing of a military police chief on the same day
Disabled former rebels broke into the parliament building and vandalized some of it
A Libyan air force colonel, Adel Khalil al-Tawahini, was killed by gunmen as he left his home
Relatives of those killed  in the 1996 Abu Slim jail massacre demonstrated outside court, holding up pictures of their dead loved ones and demanding that ex-intelligence chief Abdullah Senussi face the death penalty
A bomb exploded in the car of a municipal electoral official, damaging five cars but causing no casualties
The Al-Obaidi tribe held a protest to demand that the authorities speed up an investigation into the killing of General al-Obaidi, and gunmen opened fire on their protest tent, killing two people and seriously wounding several
The Al-Sharara oil field was blocked by residents who demanded a fairer distribution of the region's resources to improve living conditions
Gunmen shot dead a civilian working for the head of a brigade of ex-rebels
Protesters from the Berber ethnic group held a sit-in at the Mellitah gas terminal to demand greater rights
A bomb targeted a caf_, damaging the building but not wounding anyone
An army officer and his son were killed when a bomb placed under the officer's car exploded and the officer's wife and his other child were seriously injured
Teachers staged a three-day strike to demand better pay, striking teachers in Zawiya also briefly blocked an oil refinery
A fight erupted at a checkpoint manned by rebels of Souk al-Joumma and the commander of the al-Nassour militia was killed and 3 others were killed on 11/7
Gunmen driving past an army checkpoint shot and killed two special forces soldiers
Dozens of protesters demonstrated against militias and called upon the interim government to implement an earlier decision to bring the militias under control
Gunmen shot and killed two traffic policemen
Prosecutor Mohamed al-Naass was killed when an explosive device attached to his car was detonated
About 300 protesters held a demonstration, demanding elections for parliament before the end of the year
Former rebels demanding medical care shut down an oil refinery by blocking two entrances to the refinery with mounds of sand and posting men outside a third entrance to prevent anyone from entering or leaving the facility
Scores of protesters shut down an oil refinery to demand jobs they claim were promised for 1,000 people
Sheikh Muftah al-Fitouri, a preacher at the Benina air base, was killed when an explosive device attached underneath his car detonated
Gunmen shot and killed Omar al-Orfi, who previously served in Kadhafi's internal security agency
A special forces soldier was shot and killed while manning a checkpoint
A peaceful demonstration called by the Tripoli city council called for the Misrata militia and other militias to leave Tripoli and the protest turned violent when rival militias began clasing, with 43 people were killed and several hundred were injured
Soldiers and government-affiliated militias attacked an army barracks, igniting  clashes in which four people were killed and the militiamen then looted the base
Misrata militiamen clashed with the Shield of Libya, a former rebel brigade formally under government control, causing the Misrata militiamen to withdraw
Thousands of people gathered in Martyrs' Square for the funerals of three people killed in clashes on 11/15, chanting slogans against militias
Gunmen stormed the office of council official and former rebel commander Yussef al-Atrash and shot and killed him
Gunmen abducted Libya's deputy intelligence chief Mustafa Nuh after ambushing him as he left the airport and released him the next day
The Tripoli city council called a general strike across the private and public sectors to mourn those killed by militias
Several hundred protesters chanted slogans demanding that militias evacuate Tripoli and calling for the formation of a strong army and police and protesters broke into the General National Congress building, demanding legislation to disband the militias
Hundreds marched in protest against the Libya Shield government militia's takeover of Gharghour
Military governor Colonel Abdallah al-Saati escaped a bomb attack but one member of his entourage was killed and another seriously wounded
The Misrata militia fired on a Tripoli-based militia that was demanding they surrender their weapons before leaving
A non-commissioned army officer killed in an attack
An army officer and his driver escaped uninjured from a shooting
A tribal chief was shot and killed when gunmen opened fire on his car
More than 7,000 protesters gathered near a mosque, demanding that militias leave Tripoli
Dozens of armed assailants tried to use a bulldozer to destroy a building housing a pro-government militia and assailants fired rocket-propelled grenades at local residents who intervened to stop the attack
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Kadhafi's security services
Ansar al-Sharia attacked Libyan special forces, and between 7 and 9 people were killed and about 50 were wounded
Angry residents torched a jihadist office after Ansar al-Sharia attacked Libyan special forces
Shops and schools closed across Benghazi after a call by Benghazi's city council to stage a 3-day strike to protest deadly clashes between radical Islamists and the army
Three soldiers were shot and killed in attacks
Libyan forces guarding Al-Jala hospital came under fire overnight and returned fire
Suspected Islamic extremists destroyed the mausoleum of Murad Agha, the first Ottoman governor of Tripoli
Gunmen from Ansar al-Sharia killed three soldiers in a firefight, and three others were wounded
Gunmen in a vehicle sprayed bullets at two soldiers as they got into a car after leaving a caf_, killing one of them
A soldier and a policemen were shot and killed
Hundreds of people demonstrated to denounce violence, express their support for government forces and denounce extremism, and someone exploded a homemade bomb near the demonstration
Assailants gunned down a soldier outside his home and attacked a special forces base
Assailants blew up offices used by NGOs
Gunmen fired on army officer Salah Fraj al-Dursi as he drove his son to school, killing him and wounding his son
A charity clinic run by Ansar al-Sharia was hit by a roadside bomb, but no one was injured
Dozens of residents demonstrated to call for a strike to protest against insecurity and to call for civil disobedience until the army deploys to provide security, and on the second day of protests, gunmen opened fire on the protesters, wounding seven and killing one
Gunmen shot dead Libyan security forces member Mosbah al-Kabaeli
A senior officer was killed by a hand grenade when he was driving his car from the passport and citizenship department
An explosion killed local activist Murad al-Zawi and left his vehicle on fire
Members of the Toubou ethnic group staged a blockade of fuel deliveries to demand greater rights
An American teacher was gunned down during his morning jog
Gunmen shot and killed three Libyan soldiers
A soldier was killed when a bomb under his vehicle exploded
Residents demonstrated against anarchy in Darnah and to demand a police and army presence in the city
Masked gunmen abducted the representative of the Tunisian national airline carrier, before releasing him several hours later
Police colonel Kamal Bezazah was killed in a bomb attack
A car bomb exploded outside a cemetery as mourners left a funeral for a police officer, killing one person and wounding six others
Gunmen assassinated a senior port official in front of his house
A school used as a polling center was blown up after attackers planted an explosive device
Gunmen opened fire at Colonel Saad al-Jamli as he dropped off his son at a school, killing him
An individual in a car threw a booby-trapped device into a garbage dump near soldiers as they took part in a clean-up operation after a strike by garbage collectors, injuring them
An electrical power plant manager was killed when a bomb that was placed under his car exploded
Gunmen shot and killed military intelligence official Col. Fatallah Abdel-Rahim al-Qazeri outside his home
Dozens of knife-wielding protesters stormed the headquarters of Libyan Telecom and Technology in response to militias shutting down oil terminals since the summer and the protesters also called on Prime Minister Ali Zeidan to resign
A suicide bomber rammed an explosives-laden vehicle into a security checkpoint, killing 13 people
Gunmen opened fire on a special forces soldier who had been acting as imam at a military barracks, wounding him
A soldier was shot five times and killed by unknown gunmen
The son of a senior navy officer was seriously wounded by a bomb that was placed underneath his car
A soldier, a member of the commandos, was shot by unidentified assailants
Gunmen killed a military officer in a drive-by shooting
Three gunmen shot and killed Maj. Mohammed Faraj al-Ziwi in a drive-by shooting
Hundreds of protesters in Tripoli, Benghazi, and Misrata demonstrated against Libya's General National Congress extending its mandate until the end of 2014, delaying the drafting of a constitution and the holding of elections
Hundreds of protesters in Tripoli, Benghazi, and Misrata demonstrated against Libya's General National Congress extending its mandate until the end of 2014, delaying the drafting of a constitution and the holding of elections
Hundreds of protesters in Tripoli, Benghazi, and Misrata demonstrated against Libya's General National Congress extending its mandate until the end of 2014, delaying the drafting of a constitution and the holding of elections
Gunmen in a vehicle shot and killed former security officer Muftah Najem
Gunmen shot and killed Lt. Col. al-Amami while he was in his car near his home
Gunmen shot and seriously wounded a police officer
Dozens of protesters blocked off the prime minister's office and the Foreign Ministry, as well as the telecommunication company building , complaining of the government's poor performance and widespread corruption
Two people are found murdered on a beach.
Unknown attackers shoot and kill a former soldier.
A newspaper editor's child is kidnapped after he is threatened with blackmail.
A bomb explodes at a guardhouse, killing one.
Arab and African tribes clash after reprisal killings initiated by the Tabu tribe.
The deputy minister for industry is assassinated.
protesters fire shots at congress, calling for a no-confidence vote in the PM for failing to stabilize the country.
Militiamen loot a plane carrying weapons for the army when it lands at the Mitiga Airport.
Gunmen kidnap two Italian workers, residents in Martouba block the road in protest.
Gunmen kidnap a Korean trade official.
Armed groups clash with security forces as they conduct an operation.
Two officers are killed when their vehicle explodes.
A soldier is killed during an operation.
Kidnappers snatch Egyptian diplomats; they are released in a prisoner swap.
Two blasts occur in Benghazi, no casualties
Clashes erupt when the army retakes Tamenhant air base from Kadhafi loyalists who exploited tribal fighting and took over parts of the city.
The interior minister escapes an assassination attempt.
Kidnappers clash with special forces after kidnapping the commander's son.
Unknown attackers rampage through Benghazi.
protesters hold a sit-in against the government.
Gunmen kidnap a journalist.
Soldiers stop gunmen trying to enter the army headquarters.
Activists are kidnapped.
Citizens protest an extension of the GNC's rule as a transitional government.
A former prosecutor general is assassinated.
An army officer is shot and killed.
Two explosions hit in Benghazi.
Five journalists are kidnapped.
A reporter is kidnapped by men wearing military uniforms and released the following day.
Gunmen fire RPGs at a TV station, attack and kidnap the owner and presents who are released later in the day.
People demonstrate against a government extension and call for elections.
Militiamen surround a Russian airplane carrying weapons for the military when is stops for fuel; they loot all the weapons.
Polling stations are attacked before and during elections.
Polling stations are attacked before and during elections.
Polling stations are attacked before and during elections.
Polling stations are attacked before and during elections.
Polling stations are attacked before and during elections.
People protest and prevent voting materials from being delivered in their southern regions.
Berber organizations boycott elections to protest insufficient representation in drafting a new charter.
An al-Assema staff house for journalists, known for being anti-Islamist, is bombed during elections.
An RPG explodes near the Tunisian consulate.
A bomb explodes in the car of a commando, killing him.
Seven Christians are kidnapped and found murdered.
Two policemen are murdered.
Residents protest the killing of two police officers by militants.
Gunmen kill a former rebel chief who worked for local military councils
protesters hold a sit-in and then rampage through parliament, wounding congressmen and killing a guard after gunmen kidnap protesters.
Gunmen attack foreigners - they kill a French engineer and an Egyptian worker.
A car bomb kills a security officer and wounds a policeman.
Five unidentified bodies are found around the city, all executed and 4 tortured.
Two security officers are shot and killed.
Gunmen assassinate a man in a cafe.
A lawyer and her husband are kidnapped and murdered.
An air force officer is murdered in his car.
Followers of a militia leader attack the national TV station and storm the Information Ministry
Militiamen force an oil tanker crew to take oil illegally and are stopped by the US Navy and returned to Libya.
The body of an Indian doctor is found with gunshot wounds.
Pro-government militias clash with pro-autonomy militias controlling the eastern party of the country and a major oil terminal (al-Sidra).
A car bomb explodes at a military academy, a second explodes in a central district.
A Christian Iraqi professor is found dead in his car and two African migrants are found dead with their hands cut off.
An embassy worker is kidnapped to demand the release of Libyans jailed in Tunisia.
Rockets strike a runway at the airport.
An Italian is kidnapped in eastern Libya.
People demonstrate against the freeing of Libyans who took control of an oil tanker illegally, accusing the government of political interference in the case.
Militiamen prevent 50 Egyptian trucks from entering a city in protest at alleged persecution of their group in Egypt.
People stage a day of civil disobedience to protest insecurity in Benghazi.
People stage a day of civil disobedience to protest insecurity in Benghazi.
A car bomb kills an air force officer.
A jihadist leader is gunned down.
protesters block roads to a critical port calling for elections and an end to insecurity.
The interim prime minister and his family are attacked.
A Libyan security guard at the US embassy is kidnapped and escapes.
The Jordanian ambassador is kidnapped, his driver wounded.
A Tunisian diplomat is abducted to demand the release of Libyans jailed in Tunisia.
Gunmen attack the Portuguese embassy.
A car bomb kills two soldiers at a special forces barracks.
Gunmen storm parliament, forcing it to postpone the election of a new prime minister.
A car bomb kills a soldier driving his car.
Jihadists attack police headquarters, sparking fighting between soldiers and militants.
Secular lawmakers walk out in protest of an election of a new prime minister they claim is null.
Gunmen assassinate a top intelligence official; protesters demonstrate against the militia, leading to clashes between the groups and four protester deaths.
Gunmen kill four soldiers in separate attacks.
Gunmen kill a moderate Muslim cleric and two soldiers
A bomb explodes outside a courthouse, no casualties.
A militant group kidnaps a British teacher, releasing him in October.
Operation Dignity in the east to root out terrorists - bombing continues sporadically.
Operation Dignity in the east to root out terrorists - bombing continues sporadically.
Operation Dignity in the east to root out terrorists - bombing continues sporadically.
Operation Dignity in the east to root out terrorists - bombing continues sporadically.
Armed Islamists attack an air base.
Militias under control of the defence ministry but loyal to Hifter attack the GNC  and fight with pro-government militias.
A TV station is hit after broadcasting a statement by a colonel.
Gunmen kill the site foreman of a construction project.
Gunmen attack the navy's chief of staff.
Demonstrators call for legitimate security and an end to a militia-backed government.
Demonstrators call for legitimate security and an end to a militia-backed government.
Demonstrators call for legitimate security and an end to a militia-backed government.
Demonstrators call for legitimate security and an end to a militia-backed government.
Rockets hit a home, wounding a family of 20, and a special forces base.
A moderate cleric and critic of radical groups is murdered.
An editor who was critical of jihadists is murdered.
Men attack the prime ministers house with rockets and small arms.
Militants attack an interior ministry unit that opposes the elected new prime minister.
People demonstrate against the newly elected government and jihadist groups in favor of General Haftar.
People demonstrate against the newly elected government and jihadist groups in favor of General Haftar.
A prominent female journalist is found dead.
coup, calling for democracy.
Gunmen attack the convoy of an army chief.
A rocket hits the offices overnight.
Gunmen murder a Swiss Red Cross worker.
The general leading an operation to root out terrorism is attacked.
An MP is kidnapped as he leaves the justice ministry.
A suicide bomber targets a police station.
Islamist militants attack soldiers and polling stations during national elections.
Gunmen attack polling stations and steal ballot boxes.
A polling station is bombed.
Gunmen murder a leading women's rights activist and likely abduct her husband.
A car bomb explodes at a building where a panel is drafting the constitution
Bugaighis' guard, who witnessed her murder, is found dead in the hospital after being tortured.
A commando is killed by a car bomb, his two-year-old son wounded.
Foreign workers are kidnapped.
Armed groups from Zintan battle a rival militia over control of a western entrance to the capital.
Rival militias battle in southern Tripoli, closing down the main airport, which the Zintan militia controls.
Rival militias battle in southern Tripoli, closing down the main airport, which the Zintan militia controls.
A Filipino man is kidnapped and then beheaded; he is targeted because he was not Muslim.
Gunmen attack Central Bank vehicles carrying money to local banks.
Gunmen kill two government officials on two separate days.
Gunmen kidnap two lawmakers.
Suicide bombers attack a special forces barracks, killing four soldiers.
A political activist is abducted.
Protesters demonstrate against violence and worsening living conditions.
A British embassy convoy is attacked in an attempted carjacking.
A former elected prime minister and recently elected MP, known for being Islamist-leaning, is reported abducted.
Protesters peacefully evict a militia coalition from the Al-Jala hospital.
A Filipino nurse is abducted and raped before being released later in the day; Filipino hospital staff walk out in protest.
Protesters demonstrate against militias and ongoing violence.
Protesters demonstrate against militias and ongoing violence.
Foreigners attempt to flee to Tunisia to escape violence; the Tunisian head of security at Ben Guerdane is hit by a stray bullet; two Egyptians are killed.
Islamist-leaning parliament members boycott the first meeting after elections because it isn't held in Tripoli due to violence. They say it's anti-constitutional
Masked gunmen kill the capital's police chief and abduct two of his associates.
Militia members attack a Tawergha camp, kidnapping several.
Islamist extremists execute an Egyptian they accused of killing a Libyan.
Militiamen attack a private TV studio that supports the Zintan nationalists and kidnaps staff.
Islamists attack houses and buildings of Islamist rivals, including the Prime Minister.
Pro-Fajr Libya supporters rally, burning the flags of Egypt and the UAE.
Two journalists are abducted.
A renegade general expands his campaign to root out terrorism, bombing supporters of one of the rival governments.
Security officials, journalists and activists are assassinated, likely by Islamist militia members.
A Ukrainian doctor and his wife are abducted.
Tribes clash over the killing of a young member of the Gaddadfa tribe.
A car bomb explodes in front of a hotel, killing one.
anti-Islamist militias fight Islamist militias, each trying to gain control of the capital.
anti-Islamist militias fight Islamist militias, each trying to gain control of the capital.
Operation Dignity
Operation Dignity
Operation Dignity
Operation Dignity
Gunmen attack oil fields for unknown political reasons.
Gunmen attack oil fields for unknown political reasons.
Workers go on strike until they are paid their wages.
Two car bombs explode near a building where the interim government is meeting with the UN envoy.
Three activists are found beheaded after supporting the government's campaign against militias.
A suicide bomber targets the city center of Tobruk.
A suicide bomber attacks an air base.
A suicide bomber attacks an air base.
Militants bomb near two embassies they consider hostile.
Islamist militia members and government-backed militia members fight over the Mitiga air base.
Protesters denounce the UN envoy and demand his departure.
General Haftar's militia and government warplanes strike an airport held by Islamist militants.
A prominent anti-Islamist commander is assassinated.
Two car bombs wound three police officers.
Haftar's forces and the internationally-recognized government carry out air strikes to root out Islamist militias.
Haftar's forces and the internationally-recognized government carry out air strikes to root out Islamist militias.
Haftar's forces and the internationally-recognized government carry out air strikes to root out Islamist militias.
liberate oil fields and terminals held by militants loyal to the elected government in Tobruk.
liberate oil fields and terminals held by militants loyal to the elected government in Tobruk.
Air forces loyal to Haftar attack Fajr Libya west of Tripoli.
Gunmen break into the uninhabited house of the Swiss ambassador and loot the building.
A couple is murdered and their daughter kidnapped and later found dead.
Fajr Libya stages an attack on soldiers in a key oil area; after continued strikes pro-government forces launch strikes on their positions in Misrata.
Fajr Libya stages an attack on soldiers in a key oil area; after continued strikes pro-government forces launch strikes on their positions in Misrata.
Fajr Libya stages an attack on soldiers in a key oil area; after continued strikes pro-government forces launch strikes on their positions in Misrata.
A suicide bomber attempts an attack on the hotel where parliament meets.
Islamist militants abducted 20 Egyptian Christians in Sirte over several days, abducting 13 of them on January 3.
Gunmen attacked a checkpoint in the Jufra district, killing 17 government soldiers and 1 civilian.
Islamist militants killed 15 soldiers in the town of Sokna, shooting some and decapitating others.
The government air force led its first air raids on Islamist positions in Misrata; no casualty figures were reported.
The Libyan air force bombed a Greek-owned, Liberian-flagged oil tanker off the coast of Derna, killing a Romanian and a Greek crewmember and drawing condemnation from Greece. 
IS announced that Sofiene Chourabi and Nadhir Ktari, two Tunisian journalists captured in September, had been killed.
The Al-Nidaa television station in Tripoli, which is aligned with Islamist factions, was hit by two rockets, causing damage but no casualties.
Five soldiers and eight Islamist militants were killed in fighting in Ain Mara.
IS claimed responsibility for a bomb that was thrown from a car at the Algerian embassy, wounding 3 and causing property damage.
Gunmen shot and killed Sirte's security chief Colonel Senussi Kaiba; two days prior, gunmen fired on another administration official, but he survived.
Three top security and militia officials were killed in assassinations in Sirte.
Deputy foreign minister Hassan al-Sagheer was kidnapped by gunmen in his hotel in Bayda and released the next day.
22 people were killed and 68 people were wounded in fighting in Benghazi from January 26 to 27.
IS claimed an attack on the Corinthia hotel in Tripoli that killed 9 civilians and two attackers; gunmen set off a car bomb outside the hotel and then entered and opened fire, and two gunmen exploded themselves after a standoff.
Fajr Libya forces launched an offensive against government troops around the oil hub of Al-Sidra; 5 government soldiers were killed and 13 were wounded.
A car bomb exploded near the headquarters of the Tripoli Revolutionaries Brigade, killing one.
The army launched an offensive on a stronghold of Islamist militants near Derna, in which 11 soldiers and 5 others were killed.
Gunmen attacked the Mabruk oil field, killing 11 workers and kidnapping 7 foreign employees.
Pro-government forces and rebel militia clashed in Benghazi, leaving 18 dead.
Government forces launched an offensive in Benghazi in which at least 10 died; the government was backed up by air support and took control of parts of the neighborhood of al-Leiti.
Gunmen claiming to be IS members took over Radio Sirte and began broadcasting verses from the Koran and IS speeches; IS members took over Sirte university and a conference center 6 days later. 
Gunmen attacked the oil installations at al-Bahi, but caused no casualties and were repelled by guards.
A bomb hit a pipeline leading to al-Sarir, the country's largest oil field; the perpetrators were unknown.
IS released a video of jihadists beheading 21 Coptic Christians, 20 of them Egyptian, on a Libyan beach.
Egyptian war planes carried out strikes against IS camps and weapons depots in at least 13 sites in and around Derna in response to the IS beheading of Egyptian Coptic Christians; a source stated that at least 50 had been killed, but this was not confirmed; human rights groups later confirmed 7 civilian deaths.
Egyptian war planes carried out strikes against IS camps and weapons depots in at least 13 sites in and around Derna in response to the IS beheading of Egyptian Coptic Christians; a source stated that at least 50 had been killed, but this was not confirmed; human rights groups later confirmed 7 civilian deaths.
Libyan planes carried out air strikes in Sirte, targeting the convention center that IS uses as a base.
Three suicide bombers attacked Al-Qobah, hitting a police station, the home of a parliament speaker, and a gas station; 44 people were killed and 37 were wounded.
Unknown assailants fired four rockets at the international airport outside of Labraq, but did not cause any casualties or damage.
IS claimed responsibility for two bombs that exploded at the home of the Iranian ambassador in Tripoli, causing minor damage but now casualties.
Activist Intissar al-Hassari and her aunt were found shot to death in al-Hassari's car; she was the founder of the Enlightenment group, which led protests against the presence of militias in the capital.
A rocket attack in a residential neighborhood in the center of Benghazi killed two civilians and wounded fifteen.
Islamic militants seized control of the Al-Bahi and Al-Mabrouk oil fields following the retreat of government forces from the sites; the following day Islamic militants continued to the al-Dhahra oil field, looted it, and blew up buildings.
Islamic militants seized control of the Al-Bahi and Al-Mabrouk oil fields following the retreat of government forces from the sites; the following day Islamic militants continued to the al-Dhahra oil field, looted it, and blew up buildings.
Islamic militants seized control of the Al-Bahi and Al-Mabrouk oil fields following the retreat of government forces from the sites; the following day Islamic militants continued to the al-Dhahra oil field, looted it, and blew up buildings.
Militia warplanes fired on the oil export terminal at Al-Sidra, but did not hit their target and were driven off;  in response, government planes carried out a strike on Tripoli's miitia-controlled airport but caused no casualties or damage.
Islamic militants attacked the al-Ghani oil field, killing 8 guards; 9 foreign oil workers went missing and it was suspected that they were kidnapped.
IS claimed responsibility for an explosion at a Tripoli police station which damaged nearby buildings but caused no casualties.
Farj Libya planes carried out a strike on the Zintan airport, where the militia is allied with the recognized government.
Air forces from the elected government carried out strikes on Fajr Libya warehouses and positions in Zuara.
IS and Fajr Libya forces clashed over several days in Sirte and areas nearby; Fajr Libya reported that 5 soldiers were killed on March 14 and 15 in Sirte, and 12 soldiers were killed on March 18.
IS and Fajr Libya forces clashed over several days in Sirte and areas nearby; Fajr Libya reported that 5 soldiers were killed on March 14 and 15 in Sirte, and 12 soldiers were killed on March 18.
IS and Fajr Libya forces clashed over several days in Sirte and areas nearby; Fajr Libya reported that 5 soldiers were killed on March 14 and 15 in Sirte, and 12 soldiers were killed on March 18.
IS and Fajr Libya forces clashed over several days in Sirte and areas nearby; Fajr Libya reported that 5 soldiers were killed on March 14 and 15 in Sirte, and 12 soldiers were killed on March 18.
A car bomb exploded at the base of the 166th Battalion, a milita aligned with Tripoli that had been battling IS; one person was killed and one was injured.
IS militants kidnapped four Filipino nurses from the Ibn Sina hospital in Sirte.
IS fighters attacked a checkpoint near Nofaliyah that was manned by militia aligned with the Tripoli-based government; 12 militiamen were killed.
Air and ground troops allied with the Tobruk government attacked sites in and around Tripoli over several days; fighting also occurred in Aziziya and Zawiya, and air strikes were carried out against multiple targets, including the Matiga airport.
Air and ground troops allied with the Tobruk government attacked sites in and around Tripoli over several days; fighting also occurred in Aziziya and Zawiya, and air strikes were carried out against multiple targets, including the Matiga airport.
Air and ground troops allied with the Tobruk government attacked sites in and around Tripoli over several days; fighting also occurred in Aziziya and Zawiya, and air strikes were carried out against multiple targets, including the Matiga airport.
Air and ground troops allied with the Tobruk government attacked sites in and around Tripoli over several days; fighting also occurred in Aziziya and Zawiya, and air strikes were carried out against multiple targets, including the Matiga airport.
The Tobruk government carried out an airstrike against an arms depot belonging to Islamist militants in the town of Tarhouna, allegedly killing 8 Tawergha refugees; in response, the militants killed 4 civilians.
A plane aligned with the Tripoli government bombed Zintan, a town that supports the Tobruk government; soldiers from the Tobruk government shot it down.
Three suicide bombings took place at military checkpoints in Benghazi, killing 12 people and wounding 25; IS claimed responsibility for one, and the Shura Council of Benghazi Revolutionaries claimed two.
IS fighters attacked a checkpoint of militia aligned with Farj Libya in Sirte, killing 5 militiamen.
A rocket attack in Zawiya killed a Filipino oil worker and wounded five other civilians.
IS fighters attacked a checkpoint outside of Misrata, killing 7 fighters from the Libya Shield Force, which is part of the Fajr Libya alliance.
An IS suicide bomber blew up a vehicle at the Saddada checkpoint east of Misrata, killing 6 people (mostly militiamen) and injuring 21.
10 soldiers were killed and 40 were wounded when government forces clashed with armed groups in Benghazi.
Loyalist fighters and Fajr militia fought for two days in Aziziya.
Gunmen opened fire on the South Korean embassy compound from a passing car, killing two guards and wounding a third person; hours later, a bomb exploded outside the Moroccan embassy but caused no casualties. IS  claimed responsibility for both attacks.
Airstrikes were carried out against the Tripoli airport.
A tugboat belonging to Libyan security forces detained an Italian trawler about 90km northwest of Misrata; the trawler was then boarded by the Italian navy, which recaptured it and took control.
Loyalist forces attacked Tajoura and Tripoli in an attempt to wrest control from Fajr Libya; it was reported that 3 civilians were killed in Tripoli, and that 14 soldiers, 4 Fajr Libya fighters, and 3 civilians were killed in Tajoura.
Loyalist forces attacked Tajoura and Tripoli in an attempt to wrest control from Fajr Libya; it was reported that 3 civilians were killed in Tripoli, and that 14 soldiers, 4 Fajr Libya fighters, and 3 civilians were killed in Tajoura.
IS released a video of Libyan jihadists killing 30 Ethiopian Christians who had been kidnapped; the victims consisted of two groups filmed in two separate locations.
A bomb exploded outside the Spnish embassy in Tripoli, damaging the building and others nearby but causing no casualties; IS claimed responsibility.
Fajr Libya and IS forces clashed in a fight to control Sirte, and Fajr Libya carried out air strikes on IS in Sirte the next day.
protesters in eastern Libya shut oil deliveries to a port.
The Libyan air force attacked a Turkish cargo vessel after it was asked several times to turn back from the coast and did not; a sailor was killed.
Shelling in several residential neighborhoods in Benghazi killed at least 27 people in the course of several days, including 10 children; no actor was identified, but a source suspected some shelling was due to the killing of an IS fighter earlier in the week.
IS fighters attacked the town of Harawa; armed men in the town fought back, but two of their wounded were captured and taken to the IS base in Nofaliyah, where they were beheaded. 
IS fighters attacked the town of Harawa; armed men in the town fought back, but two of their wounded were captured and taken to the IS base in Nofaliyah, where they were beheaded. 
Authorities in Tripoli detained 172 Tunisians in May in an immigration sweep; they were subsequently freed after pressure from the Tunisian government. Tunisia's consul to Tripoli stated that the arrests were in retaliation for the arrest of a Fajr Libya militia leader at the Tunis airport.
IS launched various attacks on Tripoli-aligned militia in Sirte and at least 23 IS fighters were killed in fighting that included air strikes from Tripoli-aligned planes; Tripoli-aligned Brigade 166 claimed it had gained ground, while IS claimed the opposite.
Government forces launched an air and ground offensive in Benghazi, targeting the district of al-Laithi.
IS claimed responsibility for two suicide bombings: one at a checkpoint near Harawa which killed a militia fighter, and one the next day 60km east of Misrata, which killed 1 fighter and injured 3.
IS claimed responsibility for two suicide bombings: one at a checkpoint near Harawa which killed a militia fighter, and one the next day 60km east of Misrata, which killed 1 fighter and injured 3.
The Libyan air force carried out an air strike on an oil tanker transporting fuel from Greece, which was about to deliver its fuel to a power plant run by the Tripoli-based government.
IS seized the town of Harawa after a weeklong seige; IS fighters then met with local officials to negotiate access to the town and its mosques.
Gunmen attacked Prime Minister al-Thinni's motorcade on the way to the Tobruk airport, wounding one guard; prior to the attack, armed men had protested outside the House of Representatives and attempted to storm the building, firing shots in the air and calling for the removal of al-Thinni from office.
IS took control over the Sirte airport after Fajr Libya troops withdrew from it.
IS claimed a car suicide bombing that killed 5 fighters of Fajr Libya at a checkpoint at the Dafniya entrance to Misrata.
IS attacked a militia checkpoint at near the town of Abu Grain and captured and later killed 3 Misrata militia.
IS seized the last Fajr Libya-controlled areas of Sirte and took over the city, including a militia compound on the road to Misrata.
Government air forces targeted a Dernah courthouse that is a base for IS religious police, but missed and hit a house, killing at least 5 civilians.
The Shura Council of Darna's Jihadis attacked IS in response to the killing of their ledaer, Nasser Akr, by masked gunmen; 9 IS fighters and 2 jihadi fighters were killed in the fighting.
An armed militia entered the Tunisian consulate and abducted 10 staff members; the militia freed 3 captives after 5 days and the rest after one week.
Dozens of IS fighters were killed in fighting over the course of a week as the Mujahedeen Council of Derna launched an offensive to remove IS from Derna.
The US military carried out an air strike on a farm south of Ajdabiya and killed at least 17 militants; the strike targeted Al-Mourabitoun leader Mokhtar Balmokhtar, who was presumed dead and led to fighting near the Ajdabiya hospital betweeen the group that was injured and the Libyan military.
The US military carried out an air strike on a farm south of Ajdabiya and killed at least 17 militants; the strike targeted Al-Mourabitoun leader Mokhtar Balmokhtar, who was presumed dead and led to fighting near the Ajdabiya hospital betweeen the group that was injured and the Libyan military.
Government forces launched an offensive in the town of Ain Mara against the Mujahedeen Council of Derna, who occupy the town and are backed by Fajr Libya; 21 loyalists were killed over four days of fighting.
Dozens of people protested outside the National General Congress in Tripoli in opposition to the latest peace proposal; some protesters burned pictures of the UN envoy leading the peace talks. 
At least 10 civilians were killed and at least 15 were wounded when three separate car bombs exploded in Derna; the bombs set off clashes between IS fighters and al-Qaida-linked militias that continued into the next day.
Taher Allush, a senior military intelligence officer algined with Fajr Libya, was killed in Misrata when a bomb hidden in his car exploded.
At least 21 people were killed over several days of fighting and rocket attacks in Benghazi, including 2 loyalist soldiers killed in clashes with armed groups.
The Libyan air force began carrying out air strikes on ships off the coast of Benghazi that were suspected of carrying weapons for armed groups.
IS announced that it had lost control of the city of Derna after several weeks of fighting with the Mujahedeen Council of Derna.
Four Italian construction workers were kidnapped near the ENI oil complex in the Mellitah region; five days later they had not been found and the identity of the kidnappers was unknown.
Boat traffickers forced migrants into the hold of a boat headed for Europe and forced them to stay inside as the hold flooded by threatenting them with knives, targeting migrants of African origin; it was etimated that 200 people were trapped inside and drowned when the boat overturned.
IS claimed responsibility for a car bomb that exploded in Derna, killing 9 people and wounding dozens.
After IS assassinated an iman in Sirte, Fajr Libya called for an offensive to take back the city from IS; the result was five days of fighting between IS and local militants and Fajr Libya forces, which carried out air strikes; dozens were killed.
In the wake of more migrant deaths in the Mediterranean, protesters marched in Zuara to call for people not to rent homes to migrant smugglers, who use the homes to house migrants as they wait for the seas to be safe enough to cross.
IS and pro-government fighters clashed in Benghazi over two days; 5 loyalist fighters were killed.
A car bomb exploded outside the Eni offices in Tripoli, wounding 1 and damaging some buildings; no group claimed responsilbility.
IS fighters attacked an army position 8km south of Benghazi, killing at least 3 soldiers; the army responded by chasing the attackers, capturing some weapons and causing some casualties.
A car bomb exploded outside the Al-Habda al-Khadra prison in Tripoli, which destroyed 2 cars but caused no casualties.
Fajr Libya organized protests in Tripoli to encourage the Tripoli parliament to reject the recent draft of the peace accord.
IS attacked the prison at the Mitiga airbase in Tripoli in an attempt to free Muslim detainees; at least 4 fighters and three people in the prison were killed.
The government air force launched air strikes on Benghazi as part of an offensive called Operation Two-Edged Sword; it was condemned by the UN as it came on the eve of the deadline for a peace agreement.
A mortar round fired by Islamist militia killed four children playing soccer and an elderly man; it was suspected that the shell was fired to honor the recent killing of a senior Islamist fighter.
Hundreds gathered in  Benghazi to protest a proposed power-sharing and peace deal put forward by the UN; Islamists fired rockets on the protesters, killing 12 and wounding 39. 
A helicopter carrying two senior officials aligned with the Tripoli government was shot down near Zawiya, killing 19; a representative from the internationally recognised government claimed responsibility for the attack, but this was retracted the next day.
A convoy carrying Serbian embassy employees, including the Serbian ambassador to Libya, was ambushed in Sabratha, and two employees were kidnapped.
16 members of the government's armed forces were killed in Benghazi, most by landmines; officials did not specify which groups the army was fighting, but stated that they had gained control of a military base.
Tripoli authorities detained an Emirati police officer on suspicion of being a spy, and purportedly found him in posession of video from a foreign embassy.
The US carried out an airstrike on an IS command and control center near Darnah, targeting Abu Nabil, a senior IS leader; the Pentagon announced it was "reasonably certain" that Nabil had been killed.
Gunmen including Islamist fighters from the Mujahedeen Council of Derna clashed with IS fighters 20 km south of Derna in attempt to drive IS out of the region; IS announced that it was responsible for a suicide car bomb attack south of the city on the same day.
A car bomb explosion at a checkpoint manned by Tripoli-allied forces killed 6 people and wounded 17.
Warplanes from the Tobruk government launched air strikes on IS positions outside of Sirte, including Ajdabiya, in an attempt to stop IS expansion; a government officer stated that strikes also took place the previous week.
Warplanes from the Tobruk government launched air strikes on IS positions outside of Sirte, including Ajdabiya, in an attempt to stop IS expansion; a government officer stated that strikes also took place the previous week.
Rockets hit the Benghazi suburb of Benina, wounding dozens of civilians; rockets also struck two other residential districts, killing 1 and wounding 3.
An army commander was wounded and five soldiers were killed when they were hit by rocket fire as they advanced on positions held by armed groups.
Hundreds of protesters gathered in Tripoli to call for a rejection of the proposed UN peace deal and to support a separately negotiated deal; the demonstrators were organized by Fajr Libya.
At least eleven people were killed and dozens wounded in fighting between Al-Qaeda affiliate Ansar al-Sharia and armed residents of Ajdabiya.
1983 Sudan Government
Protests against the US and in favor of Iraq in the lead up to the Gulf War.
At least 10,000 students rally in favor of Saddam Hussein.
Hundreds of thousands demonstrate against the US and Egypt during the Gulf War.
Over 10,000 people demonstrate against the  Middle East peace conference in Madrid.
Protesters demonstrate against rising food prices.  Government forces fire on the marchers, killing 1.
Taposa tribesmen attack refugees at a temporary camp.  Cause unknown.
Rebel factions clash repeatedly.
750,000 protest against the US decision to list Sudan as a terrorist sponsoring state.  The PODFN only claims to independent of the government, but this protest has semi-official sanction.
More than 2000 women protest against the US decision to list Sudan as a terrorist state.
More than 1000 Nuba tribesmen march past the US and UK embassies demanding compensation and apologies for British colonial policies and US slavery policies.
Several hundred stage a demonstration against the US decision to list Sudan as a terrorist state.
Protests by students against high prices and scarcity of good.
Riots against high prices and scarcity of consumer goods.
A crowd protests against the razing of a squatter settlement.  Government forces fire into the crowd, killing an unknown number.
SPLA militants are accused of carrying out a raid on a rival rebel group, killing mass numbers of citizens.
Clashes break out between Egyptian and Sudanese soldiers after an attempt on Mubarak's life.
300,000 protesters march in the streets against Egypt as that country and Sudan brush with war.
Tens of thousands march in support of Bosnian Muslims.  The protesters condemn the Serbs and the UN.
Students protest against a speech by Omar el-Bashir, demanding explanations for poor economic conditions.  The protest spills on the streets where the students smash cars and assault a government minister.  Police use tear gas.
Rival rebel factions clash.
Protests against the government over the detention of students.  The demonstrations devolve into riots over food prices.  Police use tear gas.
Protests against the government over the detention of students.  The demonstrations devolve into riots over food prices.  Police use tear gas.
Protests against the government over the detention of students.  The demonstrations devolve into riots over food prices.  Police use tear gas.
Protests against the government over the detention of students.  The demonstrations devolve into riots over food prices.  Police use tear gas.
Anti-government protests.
Anti-government protests.
Anti-government protests.
Anti-government protests.
A coup plot reported only through secondary sources.  95 soldiers stage a failed coup.
Inmates riot in a prison.
Riots over food prices.
Riots over food prices.
Bakery owners shut their shops to protest a government order to reduce bread prices.
Riots occur over a bread shortage.  Police open fire, killing two.  Students set fire to the Finance Ministry.
500 paramilitaries stage a pro-government demonstration in the capital.
Tribes clash over grazing rights.
Hundreds of school children stage a sit-in to protest proposed UN sanctions that would ban Sudan Airway's international flights.
Thousands of Sudanese demonstrate outside the UN offices a day before a Security Council deadline ordering Sudan to hand over three men suspected of trying to assassinate the Egyptian president during a visit to Ethiopia.
Riots break out at Al-Azhari University over student elections which are ultimately won by an Islamic group.
Sudanese rebels attack Ugandan rebels.
Students stage a sit in over a new enrollment system in which less qualified applicants are admitted if they pay fees with foreign currency.  They also demand the restoration of the disbanded student union.
Riots between parties of students over an election to the student union at the University of Khartoum.
Ethiopian soldiers invade two rebel-held towns.
Ethiopian soldiers invade two rebel-held towns.
More than 100 prisoners stage a hunger strike to protest bad food and lack of medical care in the notorious Kober Prison.
Thousands of Sudanese march in a government organized protest against an attack in the southern part of the country by the SPLA rebels.  Protesters also condemn the US.
Rival factions clash, inflicting heavy casualties.
Imprisoned vagrants and beggars riot to protest their treatment.  Police use tear gas.
Rival factions of the SPLA clash.
A member of the Al Takfir sect attacks a mosque belonging to Ansar al-Sunna, killing 2.
Ugandan LRA rebels attack a displaced persons camp.
1500 protest US sanctions.
70 women demonstrate in front of the UN offices and deliver a statement calling for the UN to intervene to stop forced recruitment of high school students into the army.
Riots between factions of students over an election to the student union.
Teachers strike over pay issues.
Street traders riot and clash with police.  The police use teargas.
The government stages a rally in which to condemn the United States and warn it against military action in Iraq.
Doctors at El Obeid general hospital strike for higher pay.
Bloody clashes erupt when Arabs attack three villages of the non-Arab Mesleit tribe.
Over a 1000 student conscripts try to escape from a military camp.  Soldiers shoot them and beat them, resulting in 74 deaths.  Another 55 drown in the Blue Nile during the escape.
Mothers stand in front of buildings where final exams are administered to prevent security forces from conscripting the students.
A riot breaks out at a military training camp, where student conscripts protest against their conscription.  About 70 students escape.
Students protest an increase in university fees and the death of a student in police custody.  The protest devolves into a riot.  Police use tear gas.
Thousands of protesters riot and invade the empty US embassy in retaliation for US air strikes on the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical plant.  About two dozen people protest outside the bombed-out plant.  Large protests continue for the two days.
Thousands protest on the one month anniversary of the US airstrikes.
Factions clash in Kordofan province.
An opposition political party stages protests against restrictions on political parties.
Over a month long period, Arab and African tribes battle over access to dwindling grazing land.
Unknown gunmen open fire on the closed US embassy.
Thousands of supporters of the former president Gaafar Nimeiri take to the streets.
Government workers in Northern State strike to demand a promised pay raise.
Angry employees who were sacked break in the offices of  the SCB and express their views to the management.  The protesters say the management took no notice of the economic conditions of employee families.
Thousands of demonstrators, mainly school children, march to protest an attack on an oil pipeline by the National Democratic Alliance and the Umma Party, rebel opposition groups.
After the government denies a female student's admission to university because of her allegedly indecent dress, 500 students pour out of two universities and march into the Khartoum city center.
After the government denies a female student's admission to university because of her allegedly indecent dress, 500 students pour out of two universities and march into the Khartoum city center.
The government organizes a pro-government protest to condemn the rebel Umma Party and its bombing of an oil pipeline.
Government workers in West Bahr al-Ghazal State strike to protest pay cuts by the state government.
Government police raid an office of the opposition DFF, beating journalists and lawyers for contacting John Garang, leader of the SPLA.
Three Russian nationals stage a hunger strike to protest breach of contract by a Sudanese aviation firm.
A protest organized by the DUP in opposition to the Islamist backed military government.  The protest escalated with the demonstrators throw Molotov cocktails.  The police repress with tear gas.
More than 500 south Sudanese students demonstrate outside the US embassy to deliver a petition to the US special envoy demanding self-determination for the south.
200 Ethiopians stage a hunger strike against a UN decision to strip them of their refugee status.
Tens of thousands protest against rebel victories in east Sudan.
Workers at one of Sudan's largest banks stage a strike to demand a doubling of salaries.
Students protest against the listing of Sudan as a terrorist sponsoring state by the US.
Police attack students of Sennar University who arrived to listen to lectures by Democratic Forces Front leaders.  Riots then ensue.  The clashes leave one dead after police fire into the crowd.
Thousands of students protest over clashes in Sennar between fellow students and the police.  The police use tear gas.
Civilians riot after a military truck strikes a civilian on a bicycle who they believed was being chased in order to forcibly conscript him.
A late payment of teacher's salaries delays the start of classes, causing students to riot.  One death.  The students also protest lack of access to electricity and water.
Students protest against school fees and a shortage of textbooks and denounce the regional government of Red Sea State.  Police use tear gas after the protesters begin pulling down telephone poles and blocking roads.
Students riot against mandatory military service.  The unemployed join them.  The police respond with force and kill two.
Protesters demonstrate against the arrest of opposition leaders.  Police use tear gas in Nyala.
Protesters demonstrate against the arrest of opposition leaders.  Police use tear gas in Nyala.
Doctors on their national service strike because their allowances haven't been paid.
University students stage anti-government protests.  The police respond with tear gas.
Students protest the imposition of new school fees and shortages of teachers.  Police use tear gas.
University students chanting anti-government slogans open fire on riot police.  The group is organized by the Popular National Congress, headed by Hassan al-Turabi, the former speaker of Parliament.
A gunman from the extremist Takfir wal-Hijra opens fire on worshippers at a mosque belonging to the pacifist Ansar al-Sunna.
30 people protest outside the General Election Commission due to a delay in vote counting.  They are put down by police with tear gas.
Christians protest against a decision by authorities to move an Easter ceremony.
Hijackers take control of an airplane over Ethiopia to bring attention to the economic and political situation there.  They land in Khartoum and release the hostages.
University students riot over the measures affecting the examination system.  Police use force, one student is killed.
A Popular Nation Congress official is killed by the police when they try to arrest him, triggering protests the next day.  The police use tear gas against them.
Students riot to demand the sacking of a faculty member.
Students denounce US strikes on Afghanistan and support Osama bin Laden.
8000 protesters march to condemn US strikes on Afghanistan.
Prison inmates begin a hunger strike which escalates into a riot.  The police use clubs and tear gas.  The prisoners gain access to firearms and kill 2 guards.  5 inmates killed.
More than 1000 demonstrators led by Arab parliamentarians protest against Israel and pledge support for the Palestinians.
More than 7000 protesters take to the streets to condemn Israel.
Lord's Resistance Army rebels attack Sudanese army units.
20,000 people march to condemn Israel in response to the Israeli occupation of Ramallah in the West Bank.
Thousands of people demonstrate in solidarity with the Palestinians and to condemn the US.
1.5 million people demonstrate against the United States and Israel in response to Israel's occupation of Ramallah in the West Bank.
LRA rebels attack a funeral, forcing mourners to eat the dead body before killing them.
The Ugandan rebel movement, the LRA, flees from  a raid by the Uganda People's Defence Forces on their bases in the southern Sudan town of Katire.  The fleeing rebels attack and burn six villages, killing 470 and committing many atrocities.
The Ugandan rebel movement, the LRA, flees from  a raid by the Uganda People's Defence Forces on their bases in the southern Sudan town of Katire.  The fleeing rebels attack and burn six villages, killing 470 and committing many atrocities.
The Ugandan rebel movement, the LRA, flees from  a raid by the Uganda People's Defence Forces on their bases in the southern Sudan town of Katire.  The fleeing rebels attack and burn six villages, killing 470 and committing many atrocities.
The Ugandan rebel movement, the LRA, flees from  a raid by the Uganda People's Defence Forces on their bases in the southern Sudan town of Katire.  The fleeing rebels attack and burn six villages, killing 470 and committing many atrocities.
The Ugandan rebel movement, the LRA, flees from  a raid by the Uganda People's Defence Forces on their bases in the southern Sudan town of Katire.  The fleeing rebels attack and burn six villages, killing 470 and committing many atrocities.
The Ugandan rebel movement, the LRA, flees from  a raid by the Uganda People's Defence Forces on their bases in the southern Sudan town of Katire.  The fleeing rebels attack and burn six villages, killing 470 and committing many atrocities.
The Razaykat tribe attacks the Maaliya to avenge the death of one of their own, a policeman killed by a Maaliya policeman.  The conflict is exasperated by competition over economics and grazing rights.
Members of the al-Nowair tribe clash over an argument in a tribal court, which escalates into riots with tribesmen using knives and swords.  Nine are killed.
A riot erupts between police recruits and residents after a quarrel between a recruit and a resident the week before.  Recruits and civilians armed with guns fire one  another, killing two.
Members of the Islamist Popular National Congress assault the residence of  a senior member of the ruling National Congress.
10 youths belonging to an Islamic organization throw rocks and gas canisters at the house of the energy and mining minister.  They chant Islamist slogans and support the opposition Popular National Congress.
Students stage an anti-government riot because of the authorities refusal to allow students to commemorate the October revolution of 1964 which brought down Sudan's first military regime.
Students stage sit ins to demand the government investigate police brutality during the riots of 10/22/2002.
Pro and anti government students riot, throw Molotov cocktails at each other.
Pro and anti government students riot, throw Molotov cocktails at each other.
Tribes riot following the stabbing death of a tribal leader.  6 die in total.
Over 10,000 people protest against the impending US attack on Iraq.
Tribesmen clash with the government.
Protesters demonstrate against the Iraq War.  Riot police shoot dead a university student.
2003 Sudan Government
Tribes clash in South Darfur.
Student loyal to opposition parties stage a violent protest for student union elections.  They assault and hold hostage several lecturers and students.  They battle with riot police.
20 students riot to demand that their diplomas be upgraded to degrees.
Students riot over deteriorating conditions in their boarding houses and battle with riot police.
Teachers strike over pay delays.
High school students protest a teacher strike by attacking and setting fire to offices of the Blue Nile state's education ministry.
A peaceful demonstration by university students calling on the UN and the international community to intervene in Darfur.  Riot police suppress with tear gas and batons.
An NGO organizes a march of hundreds of children, calling on the government and the rebels to end the civil war.
Three people are killed in a riot at a Sudanese refugee camp.
Thousands of Sudanese protest Israel's assassination of Hamas leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin.
About 300 disabled Sudanese protest against Israel's assassination of Hamas leader Sheik Ahmed Yassin.
Students gather to protest against the detention of several of their comrades.  The even escalates and the students torch a building.  The police react by firing indiscriminately into the crowd.
71 imprisoned Islamists stage a hunger strike against their detainment.  They are eventually released on the 17th, although Hassan al-Turabi, an opposition leader, remains on strike until the 25th when he is hospitalized.
LRA rebels wage a campaign of violence against Sudanese villages and are attacked by Ugandan Army.
32 jailed Sudanese Islamists stage a hunger strike against their detention without trail or charge.
Tens of thousands of Sudanese march against foreign intervention in the Darfur crisis.  They denounce a plan by the African Union to deploy peacekeepers, as well as the US.
Government security forces enter a refugee camp and force the refugees to move to another camp.  Government forces use tear gas.
LRA rebels attack a Sudanese village.
Beja tribesmen begin protesting against economic conditions but then begin looting and burning shops.  The government forces fire into the crowd, killing 14.
Students at Gezira university riot over disputed student elections.  The university's facilities are spread out among many towns in Gezira State.  Students burn and pillage buildings in Hilaliah and Hassaheisah.
Students at Gezira university riot over disputed student elections.  The university's facilities are spread out among many towns in Gezira State.  Students burn and pillage buildings in Hilaliah and Hassaheisah.
LRA rebels ambush several Sudanese citizens.
Gun attack and kill contractors.
Police arrive at a refugee camp to forcibly move the refugees.  They form a huge crowd and drive off the police and then burn a nearby police station.  3 police and 14 rioters are killed.
Thousands of Muslims gather outside the American embassy to protest alleged desecrations of the Koran at Guantanamo Bay.
Students angered by the make up of a committee appointed to organize union polls burns down nine buildings in Omdurman.
Armed men attack aid workers at refugee camps in El Geneina.
Men armed with sticks and rocks raid a refugee camp.  Two villagers die.
41 detainees from the Popular Congress, including Hassan al-Turabi, and from Darfur stage a hunger strike against their detention.
LRA rebels attack a refugee camp.
John Garang, leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Army, dies in a helicopter crash.  Arabs and Africans riot in Khartoum and Juba.
John Garang, leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Army, dies in a helicopter crash.  Arabs and Africans riot in Khartoum and Juba.
John Garang, leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Army, dies in a helicopter crash.  Arabs and Africans riot in Khartoum and Juba.
LRA rebels attack several Sudanese villages.
Unknown gunmen kill 2 AU peacekeepers.
Ugandan rebels attack and kill two UN demining contractors.
Rebels kill a British aid worker.
Two tribes clash, resulting in an unknown number of deaths, including at least one aid worker for Catholic Relief Services.
About 50,000 people protest against the publication of Danish cartoons caricaturing the Prophet Mohammed, demanding that Danish and European diplomats be expelled and urging Al-Qaeda to attack Denmark.
Protesters throw stones at the offices of a Danish NGO over the publication of cartoons caricaturing the Prophet Mohammed.
Protesters throw stones at the offices of a Danish NGO over the publication of cartoons caricaturing the Prophet Mohammed.
Scores of students and women demonstrate near the US embassy to protest a campaign by the US to deploy an international force in Darfur.
Tens of thousands protest against plans by the AU and the UN to deploy peacekeepers into Darfur.
The government plans to build a dam on the Nile River, and citizens riot over the lack of compensation and resettlement options.  Up to 1000 protesters attack police guarding census workers who are in the area.
About 1000 refugee protesters riot at the Kalma camp to demand that UN peacekeepers be deployed to the region in order to protect them.  They attack and kill a translator, accusing him of working with the Janjaweed.
Refugees in camps riot to protest a peace deal signed between the government and the rebels.  Protesters and police exchange gun fire.  Six are killed.
Refugees in camps riot to protest a peace deal signed between the government and the rebels.  Protesters and police exchange gun fire.  Six are killed.
Up to 5000 demonstrators protest against UN and US plans to deploy peacekeepers in Darfur.
Thousands of students condemn Israeli attacks in Lebanon and Gaza and voice their support for Hezbollah.
Several dozen Sudanese protest a visit by the top US State Department official for Africa.
Several thousand protesters demonstrate against sugar and fuel price hikes.
A group claiming to be al-Qaeda's branch in Sudan claims responsibility for the murder of journalist Mohammed Taha Mohammed Ahmed, who was kidnapped and killed over charges of blasphemy.
Around 100 journalists stage a strike for a week to protest against a recent wave of censorship.
About 150 people protest against the UN over a proposed plan to deploy peacekeepers to Darfur.  This is a counter-protest to a wave of rallies around the world that call for an end to the Darfur violence.
About 6000 people march to protest against Pope Benedict XVI over comments he made about Islam.  Protest appears organized by youth organizations.
Unknown gunmen, believed by many to be the Ugandan Lord's Resistance Army, attack and kill 38 civilians in a string of attacks.
A former rebel and five police officers die in a shootout in Khartoum.  The government describes the incident as isolated, but a southern official said it was a foiled assassination attempt.
A string of incidents involving attacks on farmers around the Kalma refugee camp by Arab nomads.
A battle erupts between the SPLA and SSDF.  SSDF is a pro-government militia, while SPLA is the main rebel group in South Sudan.
After a battle in which the National Redemption Front rebels attack and destroy a civilian convoy, killing 30 refugees and aid workers near Sirba, civilians riot outside the UN compound.
Refugees related to 30 civilians killed by the National Redemption Front riot at the AU base to protest the peacekeeper's failure to protect them.  The peacekeepers fire into the crowd, killing 3.
Two AU peacekeepers and a Nigerian mayor are abducted and their car stolen by gunmen in the capital of North Darfur.
700 fighters of the Sudan People's Liberation Army protest against the non-payment of their salaries.  They shoot their weapons skywards, spreading panic.  A pedestrian is killed by a speeding motorist seeking to avoid the gunfire.
One policeman is killed when unknown gunmen attack a patrol
Police pursue a man who attacked someone with a knife into an Anglican mass.  The police use tear gas and batons on the Anglicans as they try to flee the church.
A tribal clash erupts in the locality of BulBul Abu Angra.
LRA rebels ambush citizens.
A protest organized against the execution of Saddam Hussein.  The government represses with tear gas, batons, and whips.
Sudan's two main television stations (Blue Nile TV and Omdurman Radio) go off the air for three minutes to protest against the detention of a Sudanese cameraman in Guantanamo Bay.  More than 2000 staff stop working during the blackout.
Clashes between rival student groups at Al-Nilayn University sets off over a week of further clashes.  One group supports the ruling National Congress Party, the other supports the SPLM of the south.
150 interpreters working for the AU peacekeeping force strike over unpaid wages and higher salaries.
Two tribes clash over livestock raiding and grazing rights.  Torjam nomads descend on a Rzigat village.  62 die.
Gunmen kill 5 Senegalese AU peacekeepers.  Senegal blames the SLA rebels.
Two tribes clash, resulting in 62 deaths.  11 villages are looted.  Clash erupts over livestock raiding and grazing rights.
Toposa cattle raiders attack the village of Lauro Payam, killing 54 people.
More than 100 people stage a sit-in outside the offices of an independent daily newspaper that was shut down after criticizing the justice minister.
Several hundred protest outside the US embassy against the imposition of new sanctions over the war in Darfur.
Protesters demonstrate against a dam project they say will destroy their community.  Police use live rounds on the demonstrators after they attack construction equipment.
Dozens of journalists protest against the detention of four colleagues who reported on the demonstration in Farraig in which 4 people were killed (6/14/2007).
Bandits attack a food program convoy and ransom the drivers.
Two Arab tribes clash over grazing rights and livestock raiding.
Two Arab tribes clash over grazing rights and livestock raiding.
Two southern Sudan tribes clash over cattle during a two week period, leaving 34 dead.
Gunmen attack a MSF compound, killing 4.
A British teacher in Khartoum allows her school children to name a teddy bear Mohammed.  She is arrested and tried by the government, and sentenced to a term in prison.  Protesters gather in Khartoum calling for her death.
Clashes between Misseriya Arab nomads and ex-rebels now governing south Sudan.  Up to 100 killed.  Tensions in the area are attributed to disputed oil wealth.
In an act of terrorism, five Islamist gunmen acquire weapons from Atbar and then drive to Khartoum looking for victims.  They end up shooting to dead an American aid worker and his Sudanese driver.
Previously unknown extremist group kills a US diplomat.
Gunmen of the Salamat Arab tribe storm a prison, freeing 90 detainees.
Several thousand students demonstrate against the Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip.
LRA rebels attack Sudanese villages.
Tens of thousands of people protest against Danish cartoons satirizing the Prophet Muhammad.
A clash erupts between the nomadic Arab Misseriya tribe and ex-rebels now governing south Sudan.  78 killed.  Tensions in the area stem from disputes over oil wealth.
A spate of attacks by gunmen on WFP drivers.  One occurs on the road to Nyala, the other in south Sudan.  3 WFP drivers killed.
Protests occur at a refugee camp.  Refugees accuse the Arab dominated government of manipulating a forthcoming census.
Fighting erupts when Arab tribes attack a garrison of South Sudan forces whom they claim should not be in the disputed region according to a peace agreement.
Tribesmen abduct four Indian oil workers.
The former rebels of South Sudan attack Abyei, under control of the northern government in a dispute over oil claims.
Thousands of people demonstrate at a government organized 'victory' rally to denounce Darfur rebels who staged a daring attack on the capital.  They condemn the rebels as agents of Israel.
LRA rebels attack multiple villages, looting and killing several.
LRA rebels attack multiple villages, looting and killing several.
200 gunmen attack a UN patrol, killing 7.  The janjaweed is strongly suspected.
The ICC indicts president Omar el-Bashir on war crimes charges.  A couple hundred Bashir supporters rally outside his palace.  Later in the day, a hundred or so lawyers protest outside the French embassy.
1500 students and Arab tribesmen protest to show support for president Omar el-Bashir and to condemn an indictment against him from the International Criminal Court.
1500 students and Arab tribesmen protest to show support for president Omar el-Bashir and to condemn an indictment against him from the International Criminal Court.
Thousands of people organized by the government protest against an ICC indictment and rally to support the president.
Thousands of people organized by the government protest against an ICC indictment and rally to support the president.
Thousands of people organized by the government protest against an ICC indictment and rally to support the president.
Hundreds of refugees in a refugee camp stage demonstrations against the government after an army raid that left 25 dead.
Hausa gather to protest a new report quoting the president as saying the Hausa are not Sudanese.  They clash with police.  One Hausa and one police officer die.
Unknown armed men ambush UN peacekeepers, killing 1.
Two newspaper stop work for three days and their workers go on a hunger strike for 24 hours to protest against government censorship.
Journalists protest against censorship and the arrest of dozens of their colleagues.
A clash between the Arab Habaniya and the African Falatta tribes.  The clash erupts over cattle thefts and other ethnic issues.  15 civilians die.  3 police die when they try to break up the fight.
A scuffle erupts between police and an Arab butcher who refuses to move to a new town market.  The argument escalates to a riot in the town.  The police fire on the crowd.  Soldiers, believing they're under attack, return fire on the police.
A local anti-SPLA militia leader, Gabriel Tangginyang, clashes with SPLA/South Sudan forces.  At least 75 die.
Tens of thousands protest in support of the president as the ICC prepares to issue a warrant against him.
Ethnic groups clash over cattle.
Thousands of people, including government employees, stage a protest against an ICC arrest warrant issued against president Omar al-Bashir.  The crowd condemns the ICC and shows support for the president.  Some of the protesters condemn the US.
Gunmen ambush and wound four UN peacekeepers.
Gunmen abduct 3 MSF workers.
A few dozen protesters demonstrate against the execution of rebels from Darfur.  Police break up with tear gas.
Ethnic groups clash over cattle.  Murles attack Lou Nuer villages, killing and abducting many.
Jailed Islamists stage a hunger strike.
Continued warfare between ethnic groups over rights to cattle grazing.  Murle gunmen attack a group of displaced Lou Nuer, killing 185, including many women and children.
Just over 100 women protest the arrest, trial, and flogging of women on indecency charges (specifically, the women are charged with wearing trousers).  The police break up the protest with tear gas.
Lou Nuer raiders attack a small Dinka Bor settlement in the Twic East region of Jonglei state in order to steal cattle.  SPLA troops respond.  A battle erupts and 46 die.  Around 70 troops battle with an equal number of raiders.
Shilluk tribal militia attack Dinka villages, killing around 20.  Dinka retaliate on the Shilluk village of Bon, killing around 5.
Shilluk tribal militia attack Dinka villages, killing around 20.  Dinka retaliate on the Shilluk village of Bon, killing around 5.
Shilluk tribal militia attack Dinka villages, killing around 20.  Dinka retaliate on the Shilluk village of Bon, killing around 5.
Lou Nuer raiders attack a Dinka village over cattle grazing rights.  A battle erupts.  80 people die.  The Lou Nuer militia deliberately South Sudan security forces as well.
Tribes clash over ethnic issues, cattle grazing, and access to natural resources.
Tribes clash over ethnic issues, cattle grazing, and access to natural resources.
Gunmen abduct a French Red Cross worker.
Tribes clash over ethnic issues, cattle grazing, and access to natural resources.
Tribes clash over ethnic issues, cattle grazing, and access to natural resources.  A southern government official is killed in the attack.
Tribes clash over ethnic issues, cattle grazing, and access to natural resources.
Tribes clash over ethnic issues, cattle grazing, and access to natural resources.
The SPLA organizes a protest against the the president, calling on him to amend laws to ensure free elections.  The police use tear gas and batons to break up the demonstration, triggering riots elsewhere.
The SPLA organizes a protest against the the president, calling on him to amend laws to ensure free elections.  The police use tear gas and batons to break up the demonstration, triggering riots elsewhere.
The SPLA organizes a protest against the the president, calling on him to amend laws to ensure free elections.  The police use tear gas and batons to break up the demonstration, triggering riots elsewhere.
SPLA/Ummah/opposition organized protest to demand the president and the ruling party amend laws to ensure free and fair elections in April 2010.  Police respond with tear gas and arrests.
Clashes occur between SPLA forces and civilian cattle keepers.
Rival tribal groups clash, resulting in 140 deaths and 30,000 stolen head of cattle.
Ethnic groups clash.
Ethnic Dinka SPLA forces clash with Messeriya Arabs over cattle.
Rek Dinka attack a Gok Dinka weapons depot, resulting in a battle.  SPLA forces intervene to stop the fighting.
Rival clans of the Dinka ethnic group clash over cattle.
Fighting breaks out between Arabs and SPLA forces as tensions rise over elections, ethnic issues, and the distribution of oil revenue.
A clash occurs between SPLA and ruling party supporters during a presidential election.
Supporters of a defeated candidate for governorship of Unity state protest.  Police shoot dead 2 protesters.
Fighting occurs between SPLA and Arab Rizeigats in a disupte over pasture land.
Militia forces of a defeated candidate for the Jonglei governorship attack an SPLA base.
Hundreds of angry victims of a failed pyramid scheme protest.  Gunfire  erupts and police use tear gas to break up the protest.
Dinka and Nuer tribes clash over livestock.
A milita force allied to George Athor Deng attacks SPLA positions.
Dozens of Sudanese rally in the capital against Israel's raid on a Gaza-bound aid fleet.
Seven gunmen abduct German aid workers employed by Technisches Hilfswerk.  They are held for five weeks.
Messeriya Arabs of the Popular Defense Forces militia attack a Southern village in advance of a referendum on southern independence.
SPLA forces clash with a breakaway militia.
A cattle raid is sparked by the region's high bride price of 100 or more cows.
Militia forces of Galwak Gai ambush an SPLA convoy.
Armed clashes occur in a refugee camp.
Armed clashes occur in a refugee camp.
Clashes erupt during a visit of UN delegates when proponents of southern independence are dispersed by baton-wielding police.
Sudan Armed Forces attack an SPLA position ahead of the South's independence referendum.
Soldiers move in to arrest a murder suspect, triggering a battle with gunmen.
Two people are killed as students clash with police in a protest against a UN-Qatari team of negotiators in Darfur.
Militia aligned with the government in Khartoum attack an SPLA convoy.
Messeriya Arabs attack black southerners.
Forces loyal to a rebel leader attack SPLA forces.
Forces loyal to a rebel leader attack SPLA forces.
Messeriya Arabs attack a bus carrying southern Sudanese.
Students clash with police over the price of food and fuel.
Students clash with police over the price of food and fuel.
Arab Spring.  Students riot and clash with police calling for the downfall of the Bashir dictatorship and a reduction in the price of goods.
Arab Spring.  Students riot and clash with police calling for the downfall of the Bashir dictatorship and a reduction in the price of goods.
Two days of fighting between Northern and Southern members of the Sudanese Armed Forces, battling over who controls left over artillery.
Two days of fighting between Northern and Southern members of the Sudanese Armed Forces, battling over who controls left over artillery.
Two days of fighting between Northern and Southern members of the Sudanese Armed Forces, battling over who controls left over artillery.
A South Sudan government minister is assassinated.
South Sudan army forces clash with forces of rebel George Athor.
A group of women demonstrates to demand the release of dozens of protesters arrested earlier in the month.
300 students protest the dismissal of five students who are unable to pay their fees.
Tribal clash over cattle.
Arab militia attack a South Sudan police station.
Clashes between South Sudanese army and rebel George Athor.
Clashes between South Sudanese army and rebel Ulony, a commander loyal to George Athor.
Clashes between South Sudanese army and rebel George Athor.
Arab militia attack a Southern village.
60 women protest against the rape of a female opposition activists by security forces.  The police arrest 40.
Demonstrators seek to hold a political rally, but they are blocked by police, who beat them with batons and arrest them.
Clashes between South Sudanese army and rebel Ulony, a commander loyal to George Athor.
Students protest against the ban on political activity.  Police open fire, killing one.
Clashes between SPLA and rebel forces loyal to Gatluak Gai.
Gunmen attack a village, killing five sleeping civilians.
Doctors protest, demanding that the government honor an agreement to increase their salaries.
800 farmers protest a government decision to seize land.
Two feuding communities clash.
A pro-government militia attacks a village in order to forestall upcoming state elections.
Clashes between SPLA and rebel forces.
Clashes between SPLA and rebel forces.
Clashes between SPLA and rebel forces.
Students protest, praising the ICC verdict that indicted al-Bashir of genocide and calling for regime change.  Police make arrests.
Students protest, praising the ICC verdict that indicted al-Bashir of genocide and calling for regime change.  Police make arrests.
Ethnic Nuer tribesmen attack Murle pastoralists, resulting in 70 deaths and the theft of more than 100,000 cattle.
A rebel militia raids a village and steals its cattle, prompting a battle with the SPLA.
A rebel militia attacks the SPLA and steals cattle.
800 farmers protest a government decision to seize land.
Hundreds march to protest a decision by the southern government to remove the contentious border region of Abyei from the south's transitional constitution.
400 farmers protest a government decision to seize land.
Ethnic clash over cattle.
An Islamic party marches to show support for the north's decision to send troops into Abyei and Kordofan.  The police break up the demonstration, even though it had the proper permits and was pro-government.
A rebel militia raids a village and steals its cattle.
Heavily armed cattle raiders wage war.
Clashes between SPLA and rebel forces.
Police use tear gas on protests over the lack of running water.
Police use tear gas on protests over the lack of running water.
Police use tear gas on protests over the lack of running water.
Police use tear gas to disperse youths demonstrating against unaffordable food prices.
Over 1000 people displaced by the Merowe dam stage a sit-in to protest the governments failure to compensate them.
Youths protest the lack of compensation for those displaced by a dam, and call for the downfall of the regime.
Students boycott an exam and stage a sit-in.  They then riot and battle with police.
Students rally and riot in support of residents displaced by the Merowe dam.
During Independence Day celebration, police fired tear gas, causing stampede which killed 3. Unclear why tear gas was used.
Gunmen killed one Nigerian peacekeeper in ambush on patrol unit, 3 peacekeepers also wounded.
Demonstrators looted, threw stones at police, and lit fires to protest imposition of unelected governor during ceremony. Police used tear gas and batons, 1 killed.
Newspaper cancelled next day's publication to protest seizure by state security agents of an earlier edition.
Residents displaced by construction of hydroelectric dam demonstrated in front of president's home adjacent to Armed Forces headquarters.
Military conducted bombing campaign to shut down route into South Sudan for refugees fleeing violence.
Two peacekeepers were wounded when armed men carjacked their vehicle.
Police raided university dormitories, beat and arrested students in attempt to forcibly evict those who remained in dorms after earlier demonstrations shut down university.
Gunmen shot and wounded 2 peacekeepers in attack on bus.
Gunmen ambushed a UNAMID patrol, killing one Nigerian peacekeeper and wounding several others.
Students held a silent march outside presidential palace to protest loss of campuses when South Sudan separated, police beat demonstrators.
British aid worker Noonan and his Sudanese driver were kidnapped by armed men, driver released later the same day.
Angry crowd gathered outside of UNAMID camp armed with crude weapons, clashed with military upon their arrival. 1 person shot and killed by troops.
Residents upset over plans to relocate local market clashed with police, 2 women were killed in altercation.
Students protested the death of a fellow student, alleging authorities were responsible and accusing Bashir of being assassin. Police fired tear gas and beat demonstrators.
S. Sudanese gangs have kidnapped their countrymen in Sudan to be sent to fight for S. Sudan in conflict with Sudan.
Refugees seeking asylum were kidnapped from refugee camp along Eritrean border.
Muslim mob destroyed church compound including farm and school for training bishops, burned Bibles.
Muslim mob set Catholic church frequented by S. Sudanese on fire, shouted insults at southerners amidst ongoing hostilities between two nations.
Refugees upset over kidnapping of asylum seekers demonstrated outside camp administration, clashed with police. Gunfire broke out, one police officer injured.
Staff of Communist Party newspaper held sit-in to protest against security agents repeatedly blocking the circulation of their publication.
University students demonstrated against high food & fuel prices and to demand ouster of president, police fired tear gas and beat protesters with batons, stripped and flogged protesters.
Hours after demonstration against food prices, men ordered anyone suspected of involvement in protest out of cars and beat them.
Students protested against high food & fuel prices and demanded ouster of president, blocked roads, burned tires, and threw stones, attacked police. Security forces made arrests, used tear gas, rubber bullets, batons; stripped protesters naked and flogged them.
Demonstrators blocked roads and gathered at mosques to protest against inflation, police responded with tear gas, arrests, and rubber bullets.
Demonstrators blocked roads and gathered at mosques to protest against inflation, police responded with tear gas, arrests, and rubber bullets.
Balandiya and 7 others were killed in ambush, rebel group SPLM denies involvement.
Demonstrations took place at Univ. of Khartoum over high prices, police fired tear gas and live ammunition in response.
Students carried sticks and threw stones during demonstration against inflation at university, police fired tear gas.
Citizens gathered at mosque for continuing Friday demonstrations over high food prices, police fired tear gas and made arrests.
Journalists and activists demonstrated to protest government shutdown of Al-Tayar for over a month.
About 60 were killed in clashes between 2 tribes over grazing rights.
Transportation workers went on strike over rising fuel prices.
Demonstration over high fuel and food prices triggered by transportation strike turned violent, protesters burned tires, threw stones at government buildings, burned ruling party office. Police used tear gas, live ammunition. 8 killed, many were high school students.
Citizens demonstrated to demand justice for those killed in protests previous day and for overthrow of regime, police fired tear gas.
Eissa was shot and killed during carjacking attempt of his car.
Members of Eissa's tribe engaged in retaliatory looting spree at offices of World Food Programme and other humanitarian organizations. Four camp residents and two police killed.
UN staff members were attacked by assailants, driver was killed.
Two soldiers were killed attempting to restore order in town experiencing looting after killing of official.
In a gang attack on camp, gunmen fired on two UNAMID policemen. Bangladeshi policeman was killed.
Armed men temporarily took a hostage and fired shots at DRA offices. Several attackers arrested by government security forces.
Six were killed in dispute over death of a person, security forces contained situation before it led to tribal conflict.
Two Jordanian UN peacekeepers were kidnapped from Kebkabiya.
Top official of Kutum was rescued from an attack, but others with him were killed or injured.
Demonstrations occurred outside U.S. Embassy by citizens upset over American-made film mocking Islam.
Follwing call by prominent sheik, demonstrators stormed German Embassy and set a car and part of embassy on fire before demonstrating at UK Embassy while others left for US Embassy. Police fired tear gas.
Citizens drove in convoy of buses to US Embassy, threw stones and attempted to climb walls of compound over anti-Islam film. Police used live ammunition and tear gas to fire upon demonstrators. 2 killed, one when hit by police vehicle.
Clashes occurred between Arab nomads and Tunjur farmers in a dispute over land use.
Four Nigerian peacekeepers were killed and eight wounded in ambush on patrol.
South African UNAMID peacekeeper was killed and 3 others wounded when convoy came under fire from assailants.
Hundosa, who has written reports critical of regime, was abducted by intelligence officers, was tortured and had her head shaved.
Youths demonstrating against lack of power for days blocked road, injured police with stones, and burned administrative building. Police fired tear gas.
Citizens angry over a surge in mosquitoes that they blame on rice farm blocked road, burned tires and trees, clashed with police who fired tear gas.
Militia attacked village and killed 10 Zaghawa tribe members in tribal clash, then drove over bodies with vehicles before looting farms and homes.
Citizens marched in symbolic show of unity to protest attack that killed 10 people.
Citizens have camped out in El Fasher to protest the militia attack upon members of Zaghawa tribe.
Justice Party head was killed and another official wounded when their car was ambushed.
Dinka upset over Misseriya meeting with UNISFA initially demonstrated then stoned Misseriya members and UN troops. Clashes ensued between Dinka and UN, Dinka UN staffer shot and killed by troops.
Citizens demonstrated to proclaim contested region of Abyei Sudanese territory. Area is contested between Sudan and S. Sudan.
Two students were found dead from drowning after going missing following peaceful sit-in against tuition fees, students arrested after pro-regime Student Union disrupted sit-in.
Students Association held news conference regarding killing of student demonstrators, then attempted to conduct a march. Police made arrests.
Demonstrations and march occurred in support of Gezira Univ. students killed during protest activity and for downfall of regime. Police fired tear gas and made arrests, demonstrators then threw stones and bus torched.
Students held mock funeral for Gezira Univ. students killed in protest, then marched into streets. Police beat students with batons. Citizens also demonstrated in Port Sudan.
Students held mock funeral for Gezira Univ. students killed in protest, then marched into streets. Police beat students with batons. Citizens also demonstrated in Port Sudan.
Students preparing to demonstrate over death of Gezira Univ. students were attacked and beaten by plainclothed government supporters, police fired tear gas and made arrests. Campus dorm burned. Earlier demonstration on campus met with police batons.
Ethiopian UNAMID peackeeper shot and killed 3 of his colleagues and fellow Ethiopians before killing himself.
Armed groups from S. Sudan clashed with Rezeigat tribesmen in area contested by Sudan and S. Sudan in fighting that did not involve armed forces of the 2 states.
Rebels attacked the Sudanese government but were repulsed
Rebels attacked the Sudanese government but were repulsed
Armed men kidnapped workers
Healthcare workers protested the move of the country's largest children hospital. Police repressed the demonstration
Rebels attacked the Sudanese government but were repulsed
Two rival tribes compete over goldmines
Two rival tribes compete over goldmines
Two rival tribes compete over goldmines
Rebels shelled Sudanese Town
Government forces retake rebel held town
Unkown attackers killed an AU peacekeeper
Rebels attacked the Sudanese government but were repulsed
Residents of Khartoum protested over the new agricultural development in the capital
Two rival tribes have fought over land ownership
Rebels attacked the Sudanese government but were repulsed
JEM rebels killed two former rebel leaders who had signed an agreement with Sudanese government
Two tribes fought over access to pasture land
protesters called for regime change
Two Arab tribes fight over access to land
Two Arab tribes fight over ownership of a Goldmine
Villagers attempted to stop goldminers from working
Unknown gunmen attacked peacekeepers
A Grenade Attack in Nyala
Local bandits have battled Sudanese government after aidworker dies
Unknown gunmen attacked UN peacekeeping units
Rebels attack Sudanese troops
Ethnic groups clash over local resources
SPLA launched a grenade strike
Arab and non-Arabs battled in Market town
Both Arab tribes battled over access to land
Peacekeepers were shot outside of tribal violence
protesters demonstrated against a drop in government subsidies for petroleum
Protesters demonstrated against a drop in government subsidies for petroleum
Arab tribes fought over access to land
Police attack a peaceful funeral ceremony
protesters demonstrate against drop in fuel subsidies
Women and children protest the detention of protesters by the government
Democracy protesters demonstrated against the state
Democracy protesters demonstrated against the state
Military observer shot
UN Peacekeepers were shot while running water to Darfur
Rebels strike government patrol
Muslim protesters demonstrate against the trial of Morsi in Egypt
Arab tribes fought over access to land
Arab tribes fought over access to land
Rebels attack Sudanese troops
Sudanese army fired on itself in friendly fire
Arab tribes fought over access to land
Rebels strike government patrol
Rebels attack town
Rebels attack army convoy
Gunmen killed two healthcare workers when they refused to hand over their truck
Airstrike by army
Rebels and government clash
Rebels attack government convoy
Arab tribes battle, reason unknown
Rebels shelled Sudanese Town
Unknown gunmen killed two peacekeepers
Government warplanes attack a rebel town.
A man from the Central African Republic stabs a Russian diplomat and his wife, grieving over his brother's death in CAR.
Government warplanes bomb rebel locations.
Police fire on protesters who demonstrate against a regional peace conference.
Rebels shell the capital of South Kordofan
Journalists and activists protest the detention of Al-Jazeera TV journalists.
Rapid Support Forces loot and burn villages, displacing 40,000 civilians.
Fundamentalists call for jihad during a protest against France.
A militia loyal to Hilal - former chief of Janjaweek militia - takes control over the town, displacing 50,000 people.
A peacekeeper is kidnapped; he is released two months later on May 1.
Students protest for peace in the region; one is killed.
Mourners at a funeral chant anti-government slogans and call for peace, freedom, and justice.
A rebel group takes control of a town, but the army quickly retakes control.
Islamist protesters burn the French flag.
Armed men kidnap an Indian contractor who is freed 94 days later.
Opposition parties protest for freedom and justice
The state governor is attacked while returning to the capital.
Militias attack villages.
Militias attack, looting and burning villages.
Pro-government militias stage counterinsurgency operations against rebels.
Pro-government militia loot two villages near El Fasher
Pro-government militia shoot and kill a police officer
RSF and militias attack homes, civilians, and steal livestock.
RSF and militias attack homes, civilians, and steal livestock.
RSF and militias attack homes, civilians, and steal livestock.
RSF and militias attack homes, civilians, and steal livestock.
Oilfield workers are kidnapped, three foreigners (2 Chinese, 1 Algerian) are released.
Government planes drop 11 bombs on a hospital
Unknown attackers assault peacekeepers who are able to repel them.
Three students are arrested during a campus rally for peace; they are allegedly tortured afterwards; three jailed students begin a hunger strike.
People demonstrate against a women sentenced to death for converting to Christianity and marrying a Christian.
A small group demonstrates against religious freedom, supporting Sharia law and the death penalty given to a women who converted from Islam.
Government warplanes bomb an agricultural area, disrupting planting.
Government troops seize a strategic area from rebels.
Government troops battle with militia, trying to flush them out of the city.
Fighting renews between two tribes.
People protest the arrest of the former prime minister who accused the state of human rights abuses.
A peacekeeper is killed while trying to mediate between two Arab and non-Arab tribes.
Rebels battle the government for a strategic area.
Governments seize control over a military base held by rebels who counterattack a few days later.
protesters call for the fall of the government and protest the arrest of a former prime minister.
protesters call for freedom for political prisoners
Two GOAL employees are kidnapped and released one month later.
The air force bombs a village, including a clearly-marked hospital.
Two subgroups of the Misseriya tribe battle.
A small rebel group attacks government troops; the leader of the rebel group is killed.
Rebels assault an area they are battling government troops to control
A rival tribe attacks another.
An advocate for Darfur's displaced people is killed by a militia member.
Gunmen ambush and kill a district chief.
An IOM employee is kidnapped and released 19 days later.
Demonstrators gather calling for jihad against America and Israel.
Men attack a journalist who called for Sudan to normalize ties with Israel.
A civilian convoy is attacked by rebels.
Journalists demonstrate after a prominent journalist is attacked over calling for normalized ties with Israel.
Displaced people stage an anti-government protest.
Three peacekeepers are killed in an attack.
Two peacekeepers are attacked while collecting water.
200 women and girls are reportedly raped.
A mentally-ill man kills two soldiers while trying to enter the presidential palace, he is killed.
Rebels launch attack on government army bases.
Gunmen attack a group returning home from visiting family.
Rebels battle government troops.
Rebels battle government troops.
Rebels capture two garrisons.
Three staff of the Sudanese Red Crescent, a humanitarian group, were killed in an attack.
Police used tear gas and batons to disperse 800+ anti-government demonstrators gathered for the funeral of an activist.
Clashes between two ethnic groups in Sudan's Darfur have left several people dead.
Sudanese rebels attacked a government garrison in the Blue Nile state and claimed to have killed 8 soldiers. 
Sudanese rebels said they captured a garrison in conflict-hit South Kordofan and killed 54 troops. The army denies the claim.
Police broke up a student demonstration of several hundred people against nationwide elections.
Sudanese rebels have attacked several polling stations during elections . State governor reported 136 civilian casualties.
Thursday: About 40 gunmen fired on UN peacekeepers, who fired back, killing 4. Friday: situation unknown but 0 killed.
One killed in clashes between student groups after a dispute. One group supported ruling National Congress Party; other did not.
Fighting broke out between the Rezeigat and Maaliya tribes and dozens were killed.
14 Eritrean aslyum seekers have been abducted in eastern Sudan after an armed group attacked a convoy.
A protester was killed after police used tear gas to break up several hundred protesters in a suburb of Khartoum.
Around 400 protesters gathered in the streets to protest water cuts. Police dispersed crowd with tear gas.
One South African peacekeeper was killed and four wounded when a convoy they were escorting came under fire.
Massive tribal clash over cattle.
Tribes war over cattle.
Thousands of Lou Nuer youth pursued Murle members to Pibor, burned huts, looted hospital after Lou Nuer attacked town of Lukangol several days prior over issues of cattle raiding and violence. UN peacekeepers dispatched, government troops fired on Lou Nuer.
Members of Murle tribe burned down 3 Lou Nuer villages in retaliation for recent attacks over cattle raiding. 22 killed.
Members of Murle tribe burned down 3 Lou Nuer villages in retaliation for recent attacks over cattle raiding. 22 killed.
Members of Murle tribe burned down 3 Lou Nuer villages in retaliation for recent attacks over cattle raiding. 22 killed.
Citizens marched to mark anniversary of independence and to call for peace and end to tribalism.
Murle tribe members dressed in military uniforms raided Lou Nuer village, razed crops, burned homes, stole over 20000 cows and killed 57, mostly women and children in continuation of tit-for-tat attacks.
Murle tribe members dressed in military uniforms raided Lou Nuer village, razed crops, burned homes, stole over 20000 cows and killed 57, mostly women and children in continuation of tit-for-tat attacks.
Murle gunmen raided town inhabitated by Dinka and Lou Nuer, town burned and 80 killed.
Nuer tribe attacked Dinka community and stole more than 4000 cattle, 78 killed. Government accused Sudan of arming gunmen.
Military and police broke up peace meeting between UN and local officials over cattle raid massacre, started firing indiscriminately. 1 UN staffer wounded.
Murle cattle raiders attacked Lou Nuer tribe, stole over 100,000 cows. 223 killed and others abducted.
During disarmament campaign among feduing Murle and Lou Nuer ethnic groups, military raped, tortured, and killed members of Murle tribe.
LRA forces have attacked villages, stopping people from farming and abducting women and children.
Teenage boy was shot and killed while fishing, community leader linked death to disarmament campaign.
Riing was shot and killed by gunmen as he drove from Juba to Torit.
Athuai was abducted and beaten after leading campaign to uncover corrupt officials.
During disarmament campaign, military has killed, raped, abducted, and tortured civilians.
2012 South Sudan Government
Dinka Gok youths marched eight hours to attack Dinka Rek tribe in cattle raid, 31 killed between 2 groups.
Soldiers rounded up civilians and opened fire on the group, killing 13 in area where recent clashes occurred between rebels and military.
Awuol, who was often critical of government and had been recently threatened to stop writing, was shot dead at his home.
Security forces fired into crowds during violent demonstations over government plan to move Wau County headquarters and local official stoking ethnic tensions, 9 killed.
Six bodies of executed Dinka farmers were found, those executed were part of group of farmers kidnapped by Balande in retaliation for brutality by Dinka police officers. 28 total farmers were kidnapped.
Armed youth upset over government plan to move Wau County headquarters and killing of Dinka farmers by Balande tribe set buildings on fire. Group clashed with security forces, 12 killed. Dinka and Balande tribes engaged in running battles.
SPLA forces shot down UN helicopter on reconaissance mission, all 4 Russian crew members on board killed.
SPLA targeted civilians in an effort to stamp out Yau Yau's rebellion
Murle associated with Mr. Yau Yau launched a cattle raid with killed over 100
Murle and SPLA clash
Murle Ambush SPLA
Unidentified gunmen kill 12 peacekeepers
Cattle Raiders killed police after they stole 750 cattle
Gunmen ransack local hospital
Ethnic Murle killed Jikany while stealing cattle
SPLA retook a town captured by Murle Rebels
Cattle Rustlers have killed 11 in stealing cattle
Nuer tribesmen marched on Murle villages (not specified) wounding over 200 in cattle raids
Murle tribesmen raid farms in cattle farm
Murle rebels launch cattle raid in Jonglei State
Machar attempted to overthrow President Kiir, but failed
Kiir's forces fight off Machar's forces as the two fight for control of the state
Kiir's forces fight off Machar's forces as the two fight for control of the state
Kiir's forces fight off Machar's forces as the two fight for control of the state
Ethnic Nuer storm UN base and kill three peacekeepers
US troops were wounded when their aircraft (carrying civilians away from fighting) came under fire
SPLA battled Nuer ethnic group as they attempt to retake Bor
White Army troops attempt to retake town from SPLA
The capital city is attacked after a period of relative calm.
Government forces clash with rebels as they advance on the two state capitals; government recaptures Bentiu. The town is looted and petroleum refineries destroyed.
Government forces clash with rebels as they advance on the two state capitals; government recaptures Bentiu. The town is looted and petroleum refineries destroyed.
People hold a march calling for peace between the government and rebels.
Rebel forces attack an army position close to Juba.
Ugandan and SPLA forces battle rebel forces. Both sides take casualties and deaths.
Rebel forces attack Malakal, where a UN base is located.
Rebel forces battle government forces.
Rebels and army units continue to fight after ceasefire; however, at a much smaller scale.
Rebels and army units continue to fight after ceasefire; however, at a much smaller scale.
Rebels and army units continue to fight after ceasefire; however, at a much smaller scale.
Government forces retake the hometown of rebel leader Machar; killing many civilians in the process.
700 soldiers defect, opening fire on loyalist soldiers and joining rebels.
Government soldiers and allies attack rebel forces who fight back, killing 60 government troops.
A report says rebels attack north of Bor, killing 60.
Rebels stage an attack on government-held Malakal.
Soldiers take six 20-year old women from a church who cannot be found later; their motive is unexplained.
Soldiers engage in a gunfight against each other over a pay dispute.
food were discovered carrying weapons, ammunition, and land mines.
Rebel forces and the army clash in and around Malakal.
Rebels seize key oil town and continue to loot and fight government troops in the state. Rebels target civilians of Dinka ethnicity and Nuer who didn't cheer for the rebels - they kill around 200 at a mosque.
Rebels seize key oil town and continue to loot and fight government troops in the state. Rebels target civilians of Dinka ethnicity and Nuer who didn't cheer for the rebels - they kill around 200 at a mosque.
Rebels seize key oil town and continue to loot and fight government troops in the state. Rebels target civilians of Dinka ethnicity and Nuer who didn't cheer for the rebels - they kill around 200 at a mosque.
Armed youth, apparently demonstrating initially, storm a UN camp, wounding citizens from a rival tribe.
Armed attackers stage a cattle raid, killing 28; police and soldiers kill 85 attackers
Rebels extend their fighting into areas in the Upper Nile state.
Rebels extend their fighting into areas in the Upper Nile state.
Rebels attack Mayom, forcing the army to withdraw.
Fighting is reported between the government army and rebels as rebels advance towards Bor.
Gunmen attack a UN convoy, likely to block supplies from troops
the government reports a misunderstanding between soldiers and trainees, while rebels claim soldiers deliberately killed Nuer trainees
Government forces take over a key rebel base in Nasir and retake Bentiu.
Government forces take over a key rebel base in Nasir and retake Bentiu.
Government forces and rebels clash, breaking ceasefires signed May 9 and June 10. Reports are vague.
Government forces and rebels clash, breaking ceasefires signed May 9 and June 10. Reports are vague.
Rebel forces attack government soldiers south of the key town of Malakal.
Fighting between the government and rebels is reported as continuing beyond the June 10 ceasefire. reports are vague, but low-level conflict is steady.
Rebels launch an attack on their former headquarters.
Rebel forces battle the government near the Ethiopian border.
A militia targets Nuer ethnic aid workers.
Government troops and rebels battle.
Government troops and rebels battle.
Rebels shoot down a UN helicopter they warned not to fly over their territory.
Rebel forces battle the government to take back the key oil town; they also target civilians, including rape and kidnappings.
The government launches attacks on rebels, 48 hours after a ceasefire. They continue to battle each other.
The government launches attacks on rebels, 48 hours after a ceasefire. They continue to battle each other.
The government launches attacks on rebels, 48 hours after a ceasefire. They continue to battle each other.
Armed youth battle government troops.
Convoy carrying journalists and officials was ambushed.
Rebel fighters bombed government positions in oil town, where 53,000 civilians are being sheltered at a UN camp.
Rebel fighters and government forces clashed for two days. Insurgents trying to capture key town ahead of peace talks.
British aid worker killed by gunmen while entering Carter Center compound. 
100 armed Misseriya gunmen attacked village, killing 4, wounding 3, abducting 8 children, and burning 24 houses.
Government troops were under attack for over 48 hours by rebels. 130 rebels killed, 14 government soldiers killed.
Four people were killed and nine others wounded in an apparent Sudanese airstrike on South Sudanese territory.
Heavy fighting broke out, pitting troops loyal to state governor against pro-government militia.
A week of heavy fighting between government factions in Bentiu forced over 100,000 people to flee.
Rebels launched large scale attack on Malakal, a strategic oil hub, in response to government offensive.
Two mortar bombs hit UN base, killing 4, during heavy fighting between S. Sudan govt troops and rebel troops.
South Sudan's government army captured key rebel enclave after month-long assault.
South Sudan's government accused Sudanese government of bombing two locations in South Sudan in the Upper Nile State.
Rebels open fire on UN base, killing 1 and wounding several.
ICRC-support hospital attacked, leaving 2 dead and 11 more injured. 
Unknown gunman shot and killed reporter in Juba two days after president made remarks threatening to kill journalists.
Rebels attacked Nhialdiu village in Unity State.
Two MSF staff killed in separate attacks on villages in Unity state. Both had worked at hospital in Leer before it was overrun earlier.
South Sudan's government troops used helicopter gunships to pound rebel positions.
Rebel forces attacked government positions, killing 14. Government troops killed 38 rebels.
7 shells fired near the home of the Ngok Dinka chief and 1 landed inside residence. Ethiopian peacekeeper and 4 year old girl killed.
Muslim fundamentalists clash with police after trying to take part in an unauthorized anti-government demonstration.
Muslim fundamentalists clash with police during a demonstration in which protesters called for former Interior Minister Zaki Badr to stand trial for violence against Muslim fundamentalists.
Two masked guerillas armed with machine guns and hand grenades attack a bus carrying 31 Israeli tourists and a few Egyptians.
Muslim fundamentalists stone two Coptic Christian churches and a youth club, burn a Coptic-owned candy plant, a neighboring timber depot, and four cars.
Unknown assailants hurl explosives at Coptic Orthodox church, killing one of the policeman standing guard outside.
Two thousand Muslim citizens riot after police officers block their traditional Muslim feast (Iftar) march, which had been banned by civic authorities after previous marchers had damaged shops and other property.
Thirteen Muslim extremists killed, six injured, in clashes with police after militants tried to block the arrests of three brothers suspected of killing their father during an argument the day before.
Four gunmen kill parliament speaker and four security men outside a luxury hotel in Cairo.
About 100 Egyptian journalists stage a sit-in to protest allied bombardment of Iraq and demand that Egypt withdraw its troops from the allied coalition.
University students in several major cities engaged in demonstrations in protest of Egyptian involvement in war against Iraq; in one instance, demonstrations turned violent in response to alleged police brutality.
University students in several major cities engaged in demonstrations in protest of Egyptian involvement in war against Iraq; in one instance, demonstrations turned violent in response to alleged police brutality.
University students in several major cities engaged in demonstrations in protest of Egyptian involvement in war against Iraq; in one instance, demonstrations turned violent in response to alleged police brutality.
About 100 Iraqis engage in peaceful demonstration outside the Arab League's headquarters to protest Iraqi government's suppression of internal rebellions and the inclusion of the Iraqi representative in the Arab League meeting that day.
Muslim fundamentalists engage in a demonstration at Cairo University in protest of upcoming Madrid Peace Conference.
Egyptian security forces arrest 180 Muslim fundamentalists in raids across the country as part of a campaign targeting opponents of the upcoming Madrid peace conference.
About 700 worshippers aligned with al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya took to the streets after Friday prayers in protest of the Madrid peace talks.  Also, government engaged in mass arrests of Muslim fundamentalists.
Muslim fundamentalists and Coptic Christians clash after a farmer, Abdallah Massud Guirguis, refused to sell land to a member of an Islamic group; 2 Muslims and 1 Christian killed.
Muslim fundamentalists attack Coptic farmers with rifles and pistols, in retaliation for deaths that occurred during a previous clash between these two groups  in May.
Member of Muslim extremist group al-Jihad assassinates prominent secularist writer Farag Fouda because of his criticism of militant Islam.
Five killed in a series of clashes in which Muslim fundamentalists attacked Coptic Christians and the intervening security forces who were at times employing lethal force to try to quell the violence.
Five killed in a series of clashes in which Muslim fundamentalists attacked Coptic Christians and the intervening security forces who were at times employing lethal force to try to quell the violence.
Police arrest hundreds of Muslim fundamentalists in crackdown in Assiut province in response to recent sectarian violence in that area; three fundamentalists killed.
Suspected Muslim extremists ambush a police car with sub-machine guns, killing a six-year-old bystander and wounding 3 policemen.
Four Muslim extremists shoot at a Nile cruise boat carrying German tourists, wounding three Egyptians.
Suspected Muslim extremist prematurely detonates bomb in bathroom of a train station, killing a man, his three-year-old son, and the man who threw the bomb and wounding 10 others.
Muslim mob kills four Coptic Christians and burns down 20 shops and a church to avenge the death of two Muslim men.
Members of Muslim fundamentalist group al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya (the Muslim Group) ambush tour bus, killing one British woman and injuring two other people.
Five suspected Muslim extremists open fire on a cruise boat carrying foreign tourists.  No deaths or injuries reported.
Suspected Muslim extremist stabs three Russian tourists as they photograph a mosque.
Muslim extremists bomb two police patrols and two shops and stab a Coptic Christian pharmacist in apparent retaliation for the fatal shooting of an extremist in a police raid on 8-Nov-92.
Police detain over 200 Muslim extremists (all allegedly members of al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya) after learning they were plotting to seize police stations and banks in Assiut (and in response to recent violence in that area).
Four Muslim extremist gunmen attack tourist bus with automatic weapons, wounding five German tourists and two Egyptians.
Egyptian authorities arrest around 800 Muslim fundamentalists in a nationwide crackdown in response to recent violence against tourists.
Students at girls' secondary school argue over tape played by one (Muslim) girl deemed by another (Christian) girl to be offensive to Christianity.
1993 Egypt Government
Thousands of members of the Muslim Brotherhood and other non-violent Muslim fundamentalist organizations protest human rights violations in Bosnia.
Four-hundred and twenty Ukrainian sailors go on strike aboard their boat in the port of Alexandria in protest of not having been paid in two months.
Students and citizens hold numerous demonstrations throughout Cairo in protest of the Hebron massacre and the Egyptian government's unsatisfactory response.
Members of the Lawyers' Syndicate engage in strikes and later hold an organized demonstration in protest of the death of a colleague who died in police custody.
3000 workers at a state textile factory go on strike to protest the non-payment of bonuses and allowances for months and to support 2,000 colleagues who had been laid off or moved to administrative positions.
Twenty writers and intellectuals demonstrate in protest of the (non-lethal) stabbing of Nobel Prize-winning author Naguib Mahfouz by Islamic radicals and the government's failure to stand up for intellectual freedom.
Tens of thousands of people left homeless by torrential rains in southern Egypt demonstrate, demanding government assistance; in the town of Durunka.
Members of the Islamic-oriented opposition Hizb al-Amal (The Labor Party) take to the streets to demand the release of their jailed leader, Adel Hussein (whom they believe was unlawfully detained); police respond by arresting 15 demonstrators.
Members of 21 professional unions stand silently in front of parliament to protest a bill that would give the Egyptian government a bigger hand in union politics; several days later.  They later strike.
Inhabitants of two villages (Abu Daud and San Saft) in northern Egypt fight with knives, axes, and gas-bottles over a shared football (soccer) pitch, injuring 50 and destroying 20 homes and stables.
Inhabitants of two villages (Abu Daud and San Saft) in northern Egypt fight with knives, axes, and gas-bottles over a shared football (soccer) pitch, injuring 50 and destroying 20 homes and stables.
Nine members of the Muslim Brotherhood defy a ban on praying outside of mosques in protest of the government's decision to continue to the ban, which only applies in southern Egypt.
Nine members of the Muslim Brotherhood defy a ban on praying outside of mosques in protest of the government's decision to continue to the ban, which only applies in southern Egypt.
Nine members of the Muslim Brotherhood defy a ban on praying outside of mosques in protest of the government's decision to continue to the ban, which only applies in southern Egypt.
Muslim rioters damage a Coptic Christian church when they set fire to an uninhabited house adjacent to the church in order to prevent the church from annexing the house to church property.
Egyptian journalists from both government and opposition newspapers engage in limited strike, cancelling newspaper issues, and later hold 8,000-person demonstration in protest of a new law they accuse of restricting freedom of the press.
Five-thousand Egyptian citizens engage in an organized rally in the capital in support of Mubarak following his survival of an assassination attempt while in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Egyptian security agents attack three Sudanese diplomats with sticks, iron bars, and knives, in three separate, almost simultaneous attacks; one diplomat seriously wounded, all three hospitalized.
A family feud erupts into an hours-long battle in a tiny village in southern Egypt, leaving seven dead, including two police officers; police use tear gas and fire rocket-propelled grenades to stop the fighting.
Four unknown gunmen, including a boy around 12 years of age, attack a car in the village of Beni Kora, killing a Muslim cleric after he had performed at a religious ceremony.
Editor-in-chief of the liberal opposition newspaper al-Wafd, who had criticized a new controversial press law and printed an editorial on tyrannical rulers, and his driver assaulted by 10 men after their car is run off of the main thoroughfare
More than 20 supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood attempt to hold a press conference in response to the recent government crackdown against the group; the participants are prevented from holding the conference by police with clubs.
Dozens of villagers opposed to Egypt's ruling National Democratic Party pelted a government candidate in the upcoming parliamentary elections with stones during a campaign stop, injuring him slightly.
Palestinians expelled from Libya by Col. Gadhafi lay in the main road between Libya and Egypt for 16 hours, closing the border to traffic and brawling with Egyptians trying to cross.
Dozens of students demonstrate on the campus of Cairo University, calling for the release of Muslim Brotherhood members imprisoned in the recent government crackdown.
Clashes between supporters of the government-backed candidates in the upcoming parliamentary elections and supporters of rival independent candidates occur in rural villages across Egypt; two killed in the clashes.  Police respond with arrests.
Thousands of students at universities in Cairo, Alexandria, and Zagazig demonstrate in protest of the military court trial of 81 Muslim Brotherhood members.
Thousands of students at universities in Cairo, Alexandria, and Zagazig demonstrate in protest of the military court trial of 81 Muslim Brotherhood members.
Thousands of students at universities in Cairo, Alexandria, and Zagazig demonstrate in protest of the military court trial of 81 Muslim Brotherhood members.
Some of the Egyptian citizens in attendance at the state funeral for five men killed in the bombing of the Egyptian embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan, shout Death to Terrorism and other slogans and carry banners in protest.
Police break up pre-election rallies held by the Muslim Brotherhood, close their headquarters,  and detain at least 600 MB members and supporters in numerous provinces nationwide and in several Cairo neighborhoods.
Clashes erupt nationwide during and after national elections between supporters of opposition parties and supporters of the government's ruling National Democratic Party over accusations of government-sponsored vote tampering.
Villagers in Abu Shendi in the northern Nile Delta region riot when police confront them with a court order ordering them to vacate their houses that had been illegally built on another villager's land; police respond with tear gas; one killed.
Police arrest 11 leaders of the opposition Wasat party.
An armed gang robs a bank.
All 12 members of the executive board of Egypt's journalists' union resign in protest of the government's failure to adequately address journalists' appeals to change a controversial law they see as restricting freedom of the press.
About 300 Egyptian lawyers and journalists set fire to an Israeli flag in front of their trade union's headquarters and shout slogans against visiting Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
Bedouin gunmen attack an armored bank truck.
Limited demonstrations, especially student protests, take place in Egypt against Israel and the Egyptian government's policy toward Israel and the Middle East peace process; police arrest over 20 Muslim Brotherhood members.
Protesters scuffle with police during a demonstration in opposition to Israel's participation in the Middle East Economic Conference in Cairo; no arrests or injuries reported.
Nearly 1,500 workers at a flour mill go on strike to protest the decision by management to stop selling flour to the workers at subsidized prices.
Over 5,000 Egyptian students and Egyptian women engage in several days of protesting in opposition to Israeli settlement expansion into East Jerusalem; police armed with tear gas and armored vehicles prevent protesters from reaching Israel.
Farmers in several rural areas across Egypt riot, set fire to agricultural ministry buildings, and clash with police in protest against a new agrarian reform law; 24 killed, 349 injured, over 800 arrested.
Saudi-owned, London-based daily newspaper Asharq Al-Awsat (The Middle East) closes its Cairo office in protest to what it considers unfair treatment against it in a libel case involving President Hosni Mubarak's two sons.
Hundreds of potters and artisans in the poor Cairo neighborhood of el-Khawaseen block a street with burning tires and hurl stones at police who had a court order to tear down the artisans' illegally built shops; 73 potters arrested by police.
Three thousand Egyptian Muslims demonstrate at al-Azhar mosque after Friday prayers in protest against Clinton's Iraq policy; days later, over 100 Egyptians, most Muslims, protest outside the U.S. Embassy in Cairo.
Twenty people injured and a dozen cars and several homes damaged as hooligans go on a rampage after the Al-Masri soccer club wins its first Egypt cup in 78 years; police disperse the crowd and arrest several people.
Villagers in Ezbat Wabour el-Nour (about 200 km north of Cairo) riot during the funeral of a man who died after two days in police custody, leaving one dead and 8 injured.  Police respond with tear gas and arrest 25 after villagers throw stones
Four hundred taxi drivers and employees working for an Egyptian limousine service go on strike demanding higher wages and social benefits from the Nasser Social Bank.
Egyptian human rights organization suspends all activities in Egypt in protest against what it saw as a government campaign of harassment against it.
Thousands of Egyptian citizens, including professionals, university students and schoolchildren, demonstrate in several cities across Egypt in protest against the the British.
Central Bank employees go on strike.
Six thousand lawyers protest in the street outside their syndicate after anti-riot police, some armed with batons and rifles, prevented the lawyers from entering at the behest of the government.
Four thousand students at Cairo University protest against Serbian attacks on Kosovo Muslims and call on Arabs and Muslims worldwide to unite to bring the crisis to an end.
Muslim extremists open fire on police in a village in the Assiut region of Upper Egypt, leaving two dead (one policeman and one of the extremists) and two policemen injured.
Three unidentified gunmen shoot and kill a Coptic priest at his monastery's farm.
Armed assailant shot dead by presidential bodyguards after attacking and wounding the Egyptian president with a knife while he was on a tour of northern Egypt.
Soccer fans angered by their team's loss go on a rampage, damaging a car, shop windows, and the nearby local headquarters of President Mubarak's National Party; police respond with tear gas and detain 99 fans.
Dispute between a Muslim street vendor and a Christian shop owner sets off rioting that spreads to several nearby villages.  Police seal off all three villages.
Dispute between a Muslim street vendor and a Christian shop owner sets off rioting that spreads to several nearby villages.  Police seal off all three villages.
Dispute between a Muslim street vendor and a Christian shop owner sets off rioting that spreads to several nearby villages.  Police seal off all three villages.
About 3,000 villagers riot, hurling rocks at motorists and setting vehicles ablaze after a speeding truck killed a 16-year-old girl.  Protesters demanded a crackdown on motorists who routinely ignore traffic rules along the route.
About 250 people riot against a police crackdown on contraband goods, overturning a police car but leaving no one hurt.
Villagers clash with police, hurl rocks at a passing train, and set three buses on fire after one of three speeding buses that had been racing each other veered off the road into a group of girls walking to school, killing two of the girls.
The wives of three Islamist journalists jailed for libeling a government minister they said had collaborated with Israel began a sit-in in front of the attorney general's office.  They were joined by several Labor Party leaders.
About 8,000 students of Al-Azhar University take to the streets and clash with police, damaging over a dozen police cars and injuring three officers, demanding the resignation of Egypt's culture minister for publishing a novel.
Thousands of political activists gathered for two separate meetings in different locations in Cairo to support two rival chairmen involved in a power struggle for leadership of Hizb al-Amal (The Labor Party).
Around 30 journalists, members of Egypt's Press Syndicate, begin a sit-in to protest the government's suspension of the opposition newspaper Al Shaab.
Nearly 200 workers at a Nestle factory in Cairo stage a sit-in protest over a pay dispute with management.
Tens of thousands of university students across the country engage in almost daily mass protests against Israeli actions against Palestinians and the Sharm el-Sheikh summit hosted by Egypt.
Fourteen killed, dozens wounded in violence surrounding Egypt's parliamentary elections.  The fighting, which took place near polling stations across the country.
At least 20 journalists covering Egypt's parliamentary elections for both foreign and local media reported being attacked by policemen and plainclothes security men, as well as by some civilians, over the course of four-week election period.
Robbers attack a bank, prompting a gun battle in which local police and civilians are killed.
Around 3,000 students at Cairo University demonstrated peacefully against Israel and Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon under police surveillance without incident.
Leaders of Egypt's journalists' union and leaders of the Cairo-based Arab lawyers' union call a short, symbolic work stoppage to mark what Arabs call Al-Nakba, or the catastrophe of the creation of Israel.
Over 1,000 Coptic Christians protest and riot inside Cairo's Abbasiya cathedral compound, angered by the publication by Al-Nabaa newspaper of pictures of a monk having sex with women inside a monastery in Assiut in southern Egypt.
Over 1,000 Coptic Christians protest and riot inside Cairo's Abbasiya cathedral compound, angered by the publication by Al-Nabaa newspaper of pictures of a monk having sex with women inside a monastery in Assiut in southern Egypt.
Over 3,000 unemployed college graduates protest a government decision restricting new public sector jobs and training places to people under 28 years old.
Nearly 2,000 Egyptians gather on a square chanting anti-Israeli slogans while calling for jihad (holy war) against the Jewish state, in reaction to the killing two days prior of eight Palestinians in an Israeli attack.
Egyptians honor a Palestinian-declared labor strike to protest against Israel's seizure of Orient House, a building described in the article as the nerve center for Palestinian nationalist aspirations in Jerusalem.
About 2,000 rioters block the main road from Cairo to Alexandria and riot after a 16-year-old schoolgirl is killed by a motorist.
Thousands of Egyptian citizens and university students across Egypt hold demonstrations denouncing U.S. and NATO actions in Afghanistan and the Egyptian government's support of those actions.
A firefight occurs between government forces and the 11/21/2000 bank robbers.  The robbers are killed.
Muslim and Coptic Christian villagers clash at the inauguration of a new Christian church after an argument over the volume of the church's bells.
Hundreds of thousands of Egyptians hold massive demonstrations and riots on university campuses and mosques across Egypt in outrage at continuing Palestinian-Israeli violence and in opposition to U.S. actions against Iraq.
Some 50,000 mourners of Mustafa Mashhir, head of the Muslim Brotherhood who died at the age of 83 following a stroke, march quietly from a Cairo mosque to the cemetery where Mashhur was laid to rest in a massive show of solidarity with the MB.
About 1,000 villagers riot, blocking a main road and throwing debris on railroad tracks, after a car struck and killed two girls.
Hundreds of thousands of citizens hold massive demonstrations across the country in protest against the start of the U.S.-led war in Iraq.  In the last weeks, protests begin to turn violent.
Dozens of members of the leftist Tagammu opposition party rally outside the Egyptian parliament to protest the rising cost of living in Egypt, which they blame on government economic policies.
Thousands of Egyptian citizens, including journalists, political activists, and university students, hold demonstrations in Cairo and on several university campuses in protest against Israeli attacks on Palestinians and the occupation of Iraq.
Thousands of Egyptian citizens, including journalists, political activists, and university students, hold demonstrations in Cairo and on several university campuses in protest against Israeli attacks on Palestinians and the occupation of Iraq.
Thousands of Egyptian citizens, including journalists, political activists, and university students, hold demonstrations in Cairo and on several university campuses in protest against Israeli attacks on Palestinians and the occupation of Iraq.
Eleven people injured, four homes and eight market stalls of Coptic Christians burned during a brawl that took place in the village of Gazra (near Cairo) over rumors that Copts were planning to build a new church in the village.
Nearly 100 members of Egypt's main opposition parties gather in the capital's to petition the president for constitutional reforms, economic reforms, and an end to restrictions on political parties and on press freedoms.
Thousands of students and Muslim women hold several peaceful demonstrations over a span of two months in protest against the French ban on the hijab (head scarf).
American University in Cairo (AUC) students and faculty, including the president of the university, hold a rally to demand that Israel free AUC student Qassam Barghuti, son of arrested West Bank Fatah leader Marwan Barghuti.
A band of about 50 armed men led by clan leader Izzat Mohammed Hamid seize 160 hostages in the village of Nakhilah during a shootout with police who had been trying to arrest fugitives wanted for drug trafficking and other crimes.
About 3,000 students demonstrate at Alexandria University in protest against an Israeli police raid at the Al-Aqsa mosque compound in Jerusalem, Islam's third holiest site, a day earlier.  Three students were arrested by police.
Around 5,000 students at Menoufia (Menoufia) University demonstrate in protest against U.S. plans for democracy in the Middle East, its support for Israel, and its occupation of Iraq.
Several hundred people gather in Cairo's central Tahrir square to mark the one-year anniversary of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq and to denounce the U.S. occupation of Iraq.
Tens of thousands of university students on campuses across the country protest the Israeli assassination of Sheik Ahmed Yassin and the subsequent cancellation of the Arab summit in Tunisia.
Hundreds of students at Alexandria University and about 500 men at Al-Azhar mosque in Cairo protest U.S.-led sieges on Iraqi cities such as those in Fallujah and Najaf, express their solidarity with the rebel groups fighting U.S. forces in Iraq
Hundreds of students at Alexandria University and about 500 men at Al-Azhar mosque in Cairo protest U.S.-led sieges on Iraqi cities such as those in Fallujah and Najaf, express their solidarity with the rebel groups fighting U.S. forces in Iraq
About 50 Egyptian lawyers and journalists protest against the abuses of Iraqi detainees by U.S. soldiers and demand that U.S. Ambassador David C. Welch be kicked out of Egypt and that the soldiers involved be brought to justice.
In a small demonstration organized by several opposition parties, protesters gathered in front of the Arab League's Cairo headquarters as a summit of the Arab League was opening in Tunisia.
Fifty-six Egyptian and Palestinian prisoners at the Gharbaniyat prison near Alexandria engage in a hunger strike during the Arab League summit in Tunisia, saying they were being held for political reasons and demanding their freedom.
Tarek al-Zomor, an Egyptian Islamist imprisoned for his involvement in the assassination of former president Sadat stages, a hunger strike over his conditions.
Around 100 demonstrators protest outside Egypt's supreme court in Cairo to urge authorities to halt the use of torture across the country.  The event was organized by several human rights groups and opposition parties.
A confrontation between local police and villagers breaks out as a police officer leads a team in an attempt to evacuate villagers from a sports center built on land owned by that officer.
Around 400 Sudanese refugees attempting to get to the UNHCR building in Cairo to protest their poor living conditions are intercepted by police who block the road and fire tear gas after protesters refuse to accept a police demand that a delega
Thousands of university students and lawyers stage protests across Cairo to mark the fourth anniversary of the Palestinian intifada and to denounce Israeli actions in Gaza and U.S. actions in Iraq.
Three simultaneous bomb attacks in two resort towns in Egypt's Sinai peninsula leave 32 dead, many of them Israeli tourists, and damage a Hilton resort.
Three simultaneous bomb attacks in two resort towns in Egypt's Sinai peninsula leave 32 dead, many of them Israeli tourists, and damage a Hilton resort.
About 300 people, including some Islamic and Christian leaders, stage a march to condemn the recent bombings in Taba.  The demonstration was organized by a Cairo-based Muslim youth organization.
Around 5,000 Egyptian pilgrims stranded for several days at the port of Nuweiba stage a protest against the poor living conditions there and demand that authorities allow them immediately to continue their journey to Mecca.
The editor of the Nasserist Al-Arabi newspaper claims to have been assaulted and briefly abducted by plainclothes government thugs who allegedly threatened to kill him if he continued to criticize the government.
The editor of the Nasserist Al-Arabi newspaper claims to have been assaulted and briefly abducted by plainclothes government thugs who allegedly threatened to kill him if he continued to criticize the government.
Nearly 20,000 Egyptians enraged at a mistake made by the Israeli army that left three Egyptian border policemen dead protest outside mosques and on university campuses across Egypt.
Several thousand Coptic Christians demonstrate inside the compound of the Coptic Orthodox cathedral in Cairo in protest over the alleged forced conversion of a Coptic priest's wife to Islam.
Around 300 supporters of the Egyptian Movement for Change protest outside of the Palace of Justice against the likelihood that President Hosni Mubarak would be reelected.
Garment workers in two large textile centers and anti-globalization activists in Cairo stage demonstrations in protest against the new U.S.-backed trade agreement between Egypt and Israel.
Garment workers in two large textile centers and anti-globalization activists in Cairo stage demonstrations in protest against the new U.S.-backed trade agreement between Egypt and Israel.
Garment workers in two large textile centers and anti-globalization activists in Cairo stage demonstrations in protest against the new U.S.-backed trade agreement between Egypt and Israel.
Pope Shenuda III, head of Egypt's Coptic Church, secludes himself inside the Anba Bishoy monastery, a fourth-century desert retreat in the Wadi Natrun depression east of Cairo, to protest the arrest and continued detention of Coptic Christians
Violent clashes erupt between Muslims and Coptic Christians in a town in Minya province in a dispute over the building of a Christian church in the predominantly Muslim town.
About 500 supporters of The Egyptian Movement for Change, or the Kefaya (Enough) party, gather at the Cairo International Book Fair to protest against the government of Hosni Mubarak and the upcoming Sharm el-Sheikh summit.
About 4,200 university students protest against the arrival of Israeli prime minister Ariel Sharon for the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and to mark the anniversary of the killing of Hassan el-Banna, founder of the Muslim Brotherhood.
About 4,200 university students protest against the arrival of Israeli prime minister Ariel Sharon for the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and to mark the anniversary of the killing of Hassan el-Banna, founder of the Muslim Brotherhood.
About 4,200 university students protest against the arrival of Israeli prime minister Ariel Sharon for the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and to mark the anniversary of the killing of Hassan el-Banna, founder of the Muslim Brotherhood.
Thousands of supporters of detained opposition leader Ayman Nour of the al-Ghad (Tomorrow) party protest in Cairo, calling for his release.
Wives and mothers of Egyptians arrested and still detained following the October 2004 bombings in the Sinai peninsula hold multiple protests against what they see as the unlawful detention of their family members.
Tens of thousands of supporters of The Egyptian Movement for Change organize numerous protests across Egypt for several months calling for democratic reforms and an end to President Hosni Mubarak's reign.
A suicide bomber detonates a bomb in the Khan al-Khalili market, a popular tourist spot in downtown Cairo, killing four people, including two French citizens, an American, and the bomber.
More than 50 journalists protest in front of Cairo's press syndicate, calling for the annulment of a one-year libel sentence against three fellow reporters who wrote stories critical of Egypt's housing minister.
Hundreds of students at Minya University take part in an Islamist-led demonstration for the repeal of emergency legislation and the regulations that control student unions.
A group of liberal university professors calling themselves Professors for Change hold two silent demonstrations at Cairo University and Minya University, demanding freedom from government and police interference on university campuses.
A group of liberal university professors calling themselves Professors for Change hold two silent demonstrations at Cairo University and Minya University, demanding freedom from government and police interference on university campuses.
Around 15,000 members and supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood stage an impromptu protest outside the doctor's syndicate in Tanta, calling for comprehensive political reform.
A suspect in the April 7 suicide bombing in a downtown Cairo market blows himself up as he leaps off a bridge during a police chase; 7 people are injured in the explosion.
Thousands of Muslim Brotherhood supporters gather in Alexandria and later in Cairo to denounce the mass arrests of MB supporters in recent days and to demand the detainees' release.
Thousands of Muslim Brotherhood supporters gather in Alexandria and later in Cairo to denounce the mass arrests of MB supporters in recent days and to demand the detainees' release.
Dozens of supporters of President Hosni Mubarak and his ruling National Democratic Party rally outside the Journalists' Syndicate in downtown Cairo.
Twenty-six lawmakers, including opposition presidential candidate Ayman Nour of the al-Ghad (Tomorrow) party, walk out of a parliamentary session in protest after voting against a controversial constitutional amendment.
About 2,000 Muslim Brotherhood members protest in front of a mosque in the Gharbiya province north of Cairo, calling for reform of Egypt's religious institutions.
More than 100 lawyers stage a demonstration at their syndicate in Cairo, calling for the release of detainees arrested in a massive crackdown against the Muslim Brotherhood.
Some 13,000 Muslims in Alexandria and Cairo stage protests to demand an official apology from the United States for the alleged desecration of the Qur'an by U.S. military prison interrogators in Guantanamo Bay.
Some 13,000 Muslims in Alexandria and Cairo stage protests to demand an official apology from the United States for the alleged desecration of the Qur'an by U.S. military prison interrogators in Guantanamo Bay.
Four detainees begin a hunger strike to protest police abuse and torture after police refuse to transfer one of the detainees, who has stomach cancer, to the hospital for medical treatment.
About 1,000 journalists and political activists protest against Interior Minister Habib el-Adly, demanding he be fired over allegations that he permitted sexual assaults on female journalists and protesters during the previous week's referendum
Hundreds of men and women rally at the Press Syndicate, calling for reform and outraged at the assaults on women during the May 25 referendum vote by men alleged to be working for the ruling National Democratic Party.
Egyptian pursue militants into the mountains.  There is a shootout, and two people are killed.
Around 1,250 anti-government protesters gather at Cairo's highest court in two separate demonstrations to protest the detention of four supporters of the pro-reform Kefaya (Enough) movement.
Relatives of 37 detainees identified by Human Rights Watch and the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) as being imprisoned beyond their official period of detention gather outside the Lawyers' Syndicate in Cairo to protest.
A few hundred supporters of opposition leader Ayman Nour of the al-Ghad party gather outside a the trial of Nour for allegedly forging some of the signatures needed for government approval to form his party.
Some 300 journalists gather in front of the parliament building in a demonstration organized by the Press Syndicate to protest against a new law that would send journalists to jail if found guilty of publishing false news reports.
About 200 wives and children of 1,200 detained Muslim Brotherhood members stage a peaceful sit-in outside the state prosecutor's office in Cairo to demand the release of their family members.
Three British citizens and one Dutch man imprisoned in the Mazraat al-Tura prison outside Cairo go on hunger strike to protest abuse by guards and prison officials.
Multiple bomb blasts hit several hotels packed with European and Egyptian tourists in Egypt's Red Sea resort town of Sharm el-Sheikh, killing at least 88 people and wounding 119.
Residents of Sharm el-Sheikh demonstrate against terrorism a day after their city was rocked by multiple bomb attacks, allegedly by a group calling itself the Al-Qaeda Organization in the Levant and Egypt, which killed 88 people.
Egyptian security forces clash with suspects of the Sharm el-Sheihk bombings.
Sheikh Mohammed Sayed Tantawi of Al-Azhar, the highest authority in Sunni Islam, along with several other prominent Muslim clerics, leads a march of several hundred demonstrators to protest against the July 23 bomb attacks.
Colleagues of a journalist suspected to have been abducted by security forces for assaulting a security officer during a recent pro-reform rally held by the Kefaya (Enough) movement hold a sit-in at the Press Syndicate's Cairo offices.
A roadside bomb explodes near a military base where international peacekeeping troops charged with protecting the peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, injuring two Canadian peacekeepers.
Police clash with gunmen suspected of connections to the Taba and Sharm el-Sheikh bombings.
Islamists kill two police officers with land mines.
Hundreds of members of the Kefaya movement, a pro-reform coalition, demonstrate in front of the Lawyers' Syndicate in Cairo to encourage Egyptian judges to insist on stronger powers in supervising next week's presidential elections.
About 1,000 protesters march to a state security headquarters in western Cairo where some political detainees have died, chanting slogans and demanding the release of detainees, many of whom are members of the banned Muslim Brotherhood.
Over 500 artists, writers, and intellectuals stage two separate protests against Farouk Hosni, Egypt's culture minister, who offered his resignation in the wake of a September 5 fire in a state-run theater in Beni Suef that killed 42 people.  T
After Palestinian and Egyptian border guards seal off the border between Egypt and the Gaza Strip with barbed wire fencing and concrete barriers, Palestinian crowds throw stones at Egyptian and Palestinian border police.
Egyptian security forces clash with suspects of the Sharm el-Sheihk bombings.
More than 2,000 Sudanese refugees stage a three-month sit-in at a Cairo park less than 200 meters from the Cairo office of the UNHCR, criticizing the UNHCR of failing to help resettle them in the West.
About 20 members of the pro-reform Kefaya (Enough) movement who were setting up a stage for a state security-approved conference on citizens' rights in the northern Nile Delta city of Damanhur are attacked by pro-govt. thugs.
Thousands of Islamist university students affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood stage protests on campuses calling for greater freedom on campuses and in national politics.
Tensions between Muslims and Coptic Christians over the DVD release of a Christian play deemed offensive to Islam erupt into violence.
Egyptian police clash with 30 demonstrators, most of them wives, mothers, and children of political detainees, who had gathered outside the Interior Ministry to demand the release of their relatives.
Two journalists covering the parliamentary elections are violently attacked in two separate incidents by unknown assailants who were apparently angered by the journalists' coverage of the elections.
At least 3,000 Muslim Brotherhood supporters stage a demonstration outside the Mustafa Mahmoud mosque in Cairo to protest against the rigged results of the November 9 parliamentary vote; six demonstrators are arrested.
Supporters of the ruling National Democratic Party intimidate and in some cases assault Muslim Brotherhood members and other voters at polling stations around the country.
Several thousand Muslim Brotherhood supporters demonstrate in front of the main counting  center for the Cairo district of Nasr City after polls close on the day of a runoff parliamentary election.
Angry supporters of an independent parliamentary candidate torch the headquarters of the ruling National Democratic Party in the low-income Imbaba district of Cairo after learning that their candidate had lost.
Massive, widespread violence erupts at dozens of polling stations across the country during the second round of parliamentary elections as Muslim Brotherhood supporters, police, and National Democratic Party-hired thugs clash.
Egyptian security forces clash with suspects of the Sharm el-Sheihk bombings.
Security forces open fire with live ammunition and use tear gas and batons to block opposition voters from casting their ballots at polling stations in opposition strongholds during a second runoff parliamentary election.
Hundreds of supporters of opposition leader Ayman Nour of the al-Ghad (Tomorrow) party hold multiple demonstrations outside the courtroom where Nour is on trial for forgery charges.
Groups of opposition voters angered at police using tear gas and rubber bullets to block them from voting in the final runoff in Egypt's three-stage parliamentary elections attack police with stones.
Detained opposition leader Ayman Nour of the al-Ghad party, on trial for forgery in what many outside observers view as an attempt by the ruling party to eliminate a political threat, goes on hunger strike to protest his detention.
An altercation between a Muslim and a Christian results in the death of the Muslim.  Muslim villagers later attack the Abu Sifin church and several Christian homes and loot several shops before authorities restore order.
A few hundred supporters of the Kefaya (Enough) movement and its various offshoots demonstrate in central Cairo to protest against the legitimacy of parliamentary elections which it claims were fixed.
Hundreds of angry Palestinians stream across the border from Gaza into Egypt after militants with stolen bulldozers break through a border wall.
Violence erupts between Muslims and Coptic Christians in the town of Al-Udaysat when Muslims torch a Coptic-owned guest house being used as a church without the proper approval from authorities.
Libyan soccer fans at the Cairo International Stadium rip plastic seats from the stands and hurl them at Egyptian riot police during a game between Egypt and Morocco in the Africa Cup of Nations soccer tournament.
All 88 Muslim Brotherhood members of Egypt's parliament walk out briefly during session to protest the ejection of one of its members.
Tens of thousands of Egyptian citizens hold massive demonstrations and riots in cities across Egypt over the publication of cartoons depicting the prophet Muhammed.
Hundreds of relatives of passengers aboard an Egyptian ferry that sank in the Red Sea gather at the docks in the port city of Safaga.
Hundreds of relatives of passengers aboard an Egyptian ferry that sank in the Red Sea gather at the docks in the port city of Safaga.
A series of street protests by hundreds of people employed in the poultry and related industries take place after a bird flu outbreak prompts the government to order the large-scale culling of birds and to allow more frozen poultry imports.
Some 50 supporters of a rebel faction within the liberal Wafd opposition party seize control of the party's headquarters and open fire on some 700 Wafd party loyalists.
A psychologically disturbed man fatally stabs an elderly Coptic Christian and wounds at least five other worshippers outside several Coptic churches in Alexandria, sparking three days of rioting and violent clashes between Muslims and Copts.
Pro-reform judges and members of multiple opposition groups stage a series of protests in support of two judges facing disciplinary action after alleging the judiciary helped rig elections.
Pro-reform judges and members of multiple opposition groups stage a series of protests in support of two judges facing disciplinary action after alleging the judiciary helped rig elections.
Pro-reform judges and members of multiple opposition groups stage a series of protests in support of two judges facing disciplinary action after alleging the judiciary helped rig elections.
Jailed opposition leader Ayman Nour of the al-Ghad (Tomorrow) party undertakes a three-day hunger strike to protest the conditions of his detention.
More than 1,000 demonstrators gather in the low-income El-Zawiyah el-Hamrah district of Cairo to protest the arrests of 22 suspected members of a new Islamist group, Al-Ta'efa al-Mansoura (The Victorious Sect).
Three bombs rip through a promenade in Dahab, a resort town located on the Sinai peninsula, killing at least 24 Egyptian and foreign tourists, including a five-year-old German child.
Two suicide bombers target the Multinational Force and Egyptian police.  There are no fatalities.
Twenty-five members of the Muslim Brotherhood are arrested in the Nile Delta province of el-Sharqiya as they were hanging posters condemning Egypt's emergency laws which ban street demonstrations.
Government forces clash with suspected terrorists.
Members of the al-Ghad (Tomorrow) party demonstrate outside their party's headquarters following the ruling by an appeals court not to hear the case of former al-Ghad leader Ayman Nour, who was convicted on December 24, 2005, of forgery.
Government forces clash with suspected terrorists.
Some 40 anti-globalization activists protest at the World Economic Forum being held in the resort town of Sharm el-Sheikh.
Pro-reform activists gather outside the Qasr al-Nil police station in Cairo to denounce the alleged torture and sexual abuse of two fellow activists detained there after a May 25 rally; at least three of the protesters are arrested.
Government forces clash with suspected terrorists.
Police use tear gas to disperse hundreds of villagers in the town of Dafash in Minya province who were protesting the fatal stabbing of a fellow Coptic Christian by a Muslim man over a land dispute between the two men.
Some 2,000 Muslim Brotherhood members protest outside a courthouse in Zagazig in support of a senior Brotherhood member on trial there.
Several dozen members of the Journalists' Syndicate demonstrate in front of the syndicate's main offices in Cairo to express their solidarity with three colleagues on trial for denouncing alleged fraud.
Government forces clash with suspected terrorists.
Thousands of demonstrators gather in multiple demonstrations, some organized by the Muslim Brotherhood, in Cairo and the northern province of Damietta to denounce the Israeli offensive in Gaza and to call for a holy war against Israel.
Thousands of demonstrators gather in multiple demonstrations, some organized by the Muslim Brotherhood, in Cairo and the northern province of Damietta to denounce the Israeli offensive in Gaza and to call for a holy war against Israel.
Two dozen members of the Journalists' Syndicate launch a hunger strike at a rally in front in of the syndicate's offices to protest a new law that institutes prison time for journalists who write about the private finances of govt. ministers.
Palestinian militants firing guns force open a border gate between Gaza and Egypt, allowing at least 600 Palestinians stream into Egypt.  Egyptian border police used tear gas and dogs to try to disperse the crowd.
Numerous demonstrations take place in Cairo in protest against the Israeli incursion into Lebanon as thousands of demonstrators call on Arab governments to act to stop the fighting, denounce the United States, and express  support for Hezbollah
Numerous demonstrations take place in Cairo in protest against the Israeli incursion into Lebanon as thousands of demonstrators call on Arab governments to act to stop the fighting, denounce the United States, and express  support for Hezbollah
In a demonstration organized by the Muslim Brotherhood, some 100 worshippers gather at al-Azhar mosque after Friday prayers to protest remarks made by Pope Benedict XVI about the prophet Muhammed and jihad.
Students at Helwan University protest against a university ban on wearing the niqab--the full-face veil worn by some Muslim women that allows only the eyes to show--inside the women's residence halls.
About 3,000 workers at Egypt's largest shipyard go on strike after the death of a colleague who was killed in a crane accident the day before.  The workers demanded better working conditions and full compensation for the victim's family.
Thousands of university students, including many veiled women and supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood, stage multiple demonstrations at Minya University and Al-Azhar University in protest against Culture Minister Faruq Hosni's comments.
Thousands of university students, including many veiled women and supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood, stage multiple demonstrations at Minya University and Al-Azhar University in protest against Culture Minister Faruq Hosni's comments.
Dozens of Iraqi refugees stage demonstrations at the Education Ministry and the residency department in downtown Cairo to protest restrictions placed on them by the Egyptian government.
Tens of thousands of public-sector workers, from textile workers to accountants to doctors to university lecturers, engage in dozens of strikes and protests nationwide to demand higher wages in the face of rising inflation.
Hundreds of Muslim Brotherhood supporters demonstrate at Al-Azhar University to protest the expulsion of some Brotherhood supporters from universities.
Just over 100 supporters of the pro-reform Kefaya movement gather outside of the Press Syndicate in Cairo to mark the anniversary of their campaign to end President Hosni Mubarak's rule.
Surrounded by riot police, a group of about 20 activists holds a candlelight vigil at the spot where, a year ago, some 25 Sudanese refugees died when Egyptian security forces used batons and water cannons to evict them.
Opposition groups angered over the hasty execution of Saddam Hussein hold protests, calling on Arab governments to expel Iraqi diplomatic missions from their countries and to denounce the US.
Around 200 demonstrators gather outside the Sayeda Zeinab mosque in downtown Cairo to mark the 30th anniversary of the 1977 bread riots and to protest against rising prices of basic commodities.
Some 30 photographers from Egyptian newspapers and international wire agencies stage a demonstration outside the Journalists' Syndicate in downtown Cairo to protest their exclusion from parliament.
Some 3,500 Muslim Brotherhood members attempt to stage a mass demonstration outside of Al-Azhar mosque after Friday prayers to protest Israeli construction on a site in Jerusalem considered holy to both Muslims and Jews.
An Egyptian policeman refuses to guard the Israeli embassy in Cairo and launches a hunger strike in protest.  He was sentenced to six months detention by a police tribunal.
About 200 relatives and friends of 29 known Muslim Brotherhood financiers protest outside a Cairo courtroom against the court's decision to freeze the financial assets of the 29 men on trial.
About 100 Kefaya movement demonstrators gather in Cairo's central Tahrir square to denounce constitutional amendments proposed by President Hosni Mubarak.
Several hundred worshippers gather outside the Al-Rifai mosque in downtown el-Arish in north Sinai after Friday prayers to protest the alleged killings of Egyptian prisoners of war by Israeli soldiers during the June 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
Some 200 demonstrators from the Qalaat al-Kabash area of downtown Cairo riot to demand shelter after a fire on March 20 destroyed their homes.
More than 1,000 Bedouins stage an anti-government protest following the recent deaths of two Bedouins in clashes with police at a police checkpoint in the middle of the Sinai peninsula near the border with Israel.
Muslims and Coptic Christians clash with sticks, stones, and Molotov cocktails after Muslim residents of the village of Bamha objected to suspected efforts by Christians to build a church on a piece of public land.
During an election of members to the Shura Council, police and security forces bar opposition voters from polling stations across the country and arrest about 100 opposition voters.
Violent clashes erupt between Muslims and Coptic Christians in Alexandria and the village Saft Meydum south of Cairo; nearly 50 people are arrested and several injured in the two incidents.
Violent clashes erupt between Muslims and Coptic Christians in Alexandria and the village Saft Meydum south of Cairo; nearly 50 people are arrested and several injured in the two incidents.
Thousands of people across Egypt stage multiple protests during a major water shortage.
Thousands of Palestinians stuck in Egypt following the June 9th closing of the Rafah border crossing protest to pressure local Egyptian authorities to reopen the border terminal.
Thousands of Bedouins riot in multiple towns in the Sinai peninsula in protest against government mistreatment in the wake of a government plan to evict Bedouins and demolish their homes in order to improve security on the border.
A violent clash between Muslim and Christian youths takes place after a Muslim youth sees a Muslim girl headed toward a residential building with a Christian youth and demands to know where the girl is being taken.
Scores of masked, armed Bedouins from the Tarabin tribe open fire on Bedouins from the rival Fawakhriya tribe in the Sinai city of el-Arish, wounding three people and damaging shops and cars.
Twenty-three independent and opposition newspapers affiliated with the Press Syndicate suspend publication for one day to protest a recent government clampdown that has seen several journalists hit with lengthy prison sentences.
Police fire tear gas on hundreds of Muslim worshippers gathered outside for prayers celebrating Eid al-Fitr, the festival marking the end of the holy month of Ramadan.
Muslims and Coptic Christians clash in the village of Izbat el-Abid over a land dispute.  Muslim villagers were angered over the extension of a monastery they claimed was being built on state property in a nearby village.
Some 1,000 Muslim Brotherhood student members at Menoufia University protest against alleged vote rigging and security interference in student union elections.
Dozens of members of the al-Ghad (Tomorrow) party hold a candlelight vigil outside the party's headquarters in downtown Cairo to mark two years since a judge ordered former al-Ghad leader imprisoned.
About 150 Muslims angered by the alleged rape and attempted abduction of a teenage Muslim girl by Coptic Christians riot in the southern town of Isna, setting fire to several shops, smashing windows and hurling Molotov cocktails at a church.
Hundreds of Bedouins burn tires and hurl stones at government cars, seriously injuring one government employee, in an area south of the Rafah border crossing into Egypt.
Over a hundred Muslim Brotherhood members and pro-reform activists gather in protests organized by the Muslim Brotherhood against U.S. President George W. Bush's visit to Egypt.
Some 40 supporters of the Kefaya movement arrested while trying to reach the Sayeda Zeinab square in Cairo during a protest against price hikes.
Muslim Brotherhood members stage massive protests in support of Palestinians in Gaza suffering for days under an Israeli blockade and fuel cut.  In Cairo, riot police used batons and tear gas against the demonstrators and arrest over 500.
Muslim Brotherhood members stage massive protests in support of Palestinians in Gaza suffering for days under an Israeli blockade and fuel cut.  In Cairo, riot police used batons and tear gas against the demonstrators and arrest over 500.
Hundreds of Palestinian protesters break through the closed border crossing between Egypt and the Gaza Strip and clash with Egyptian border police.  Rioters hurled stones at police and chanted slogans against Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
American anti-war activist Cindy Sheehan joins a protest of some 50 heavily veiled women and children of 40 senior Muslim Brotherhood members detained for the past year.
Some 4,000 students and faculty at Assiut University stage a demonstration led by the president of the university in protest against the republication by foreign newspapers of Danish cartoons depicting the prophet Muhammed.
Over 6,500 Muslim Brotherhood student members hold multiple demonstrations at Egyptian universities to protest the military trial of 40 top Muslim Brotherhood leaders and financiers on charges of money laundering and terrorism.
Over 6,500 Muslim Brotherhood student members hold multiple demonstrations at Egyptian universities to protest the military trial of 40 top Muslim Brotherhood leaders and financiers on charges of money laundering and terrorism.
Over 16,000 students demonstrate at universities in three major Egyptian cities, calling for an end to the Israeli attacks in the Gaza Strip that have killed dozens, including children.
Over 16,000 students demonstrate at universities in three major Egyptian cities, calling for an end to the Israeli attacks in the Gaza Strip that have killed dozens, including children.
Over 16,000 students demonstrate at universities in three major Egyptian cities, calling for an end to the Israeli attacks in the Gaza Strip that have killed dozens, including children.
Tens of thousands of Muslim Brotherhood members stage multiple demonstrations across Egypt to protest a wave of arrests that have targeted the group's leaders and potential candidates ahead of upcoming local elections to be held on April 8.
Hundreds of residents of the ancient Egyptian city of Luxor clash with riot police during a protest against government attempts to move them to make room for an open-air museum free of modern buildings.
Some 5,000 residents of Bahariya take to the streets, shouting and burning tires, to protest a government decision to redraw provincial boundaries, technically moving them from Giza province to the poorer Minya province.  Police used tear gas
More than 5,000 demonstrators in the Mediterranean resort town of Damietta march on local government offices to demand a halt to construction of a nearby fertilizer plant, which protesters and environmentalists say will pollute the area.
Protesters gather to demonstrate against Mubarak on his 80th birthday.
Some 280 prisoners at Borg el-Arab jail near Alexandria launch a hunger strike to protest their continued detention despite repeated court orders for their release.
Suspected Muslim gunmen storm the historic Abu Fana monastery in the southern town of Mallawi in Minya province and kidnap three monks, sparking clashes between Muslims and Christians that left one person dead and four wounded.
Some 8,000 demonstrators in the Mediterranean coastal town of Burg al-Burullus block the main Cairo-Mediterranean highway with burning tires to protest a government decision to stop providing flour subsidies.
Some 30 youth activists calling for political reform and the release of political detainees are arrested by police during a peaceful protest on a beach in Alexandria.
Dozens of women stage a demonstration outside the governor's office in el-Arish to protest the months-long detention without trial of their relatives who were rounded up by security forces in connection with the Sinai bombing attacks.
Residents of a Cairo shantytown flattened by a rockslide that crushed dozens of homes and buried whole families, killing at least 50 and injuring dozens more, throw rocks at security forces.
Some 3,000 prisoners at Assiut prison riot, take three prison guards hostage, and attempt a jail break after hearing rumors that another inmate had been tortured to death by police.
Masked bandits kidnap a group of 19 foreign tourists and Egyptians who were on an expedition in a remote corner of the Sahara desert in southwestern Egypt.
At least 25 members of the Muslim Brotherhood who had gathered outside the Journalists' Syndicate in downtown Cairo preparing to leave on a 200-mile trip across the Sinai desert to deliver supplies to Palestinians in Gaza are arrested by police
At least 25 members of the Muslim Brotherhood who had gathered outside the Journalists' Syndicate in downtown Cairo preparing to leave on a 200-mile trip across the Sinai desert to deliver supplies to Palestinians in Gaza are arrested by police
At least 25 members of the Muslim Brotherhood who had gathered outside the Journalists' Syndicate in downtown Cairo preparing to leave on a 200-mile trip across the Sinai desert to deliver supplies to Palestinians in Gaza are arrested by police
More than 100 residents of Samalout attack police with stones and set fire to a police truck after learning of the death of a pregnant woman who died of internal bleeding when police shoved her to floor.
About 200 supporters of Moussa Moustafa Moussa, a pro-government figure who claims to be the rightful leader of the al-Ghad (Tomorrow) party, storm the al-Ghad headquarters and set it on fire.
A woman is killed and another injured in the southern city of Qena after they stand in front of a bulldozer that was fulfilling a court-ordered demolition of the women's house, which was built without a permit.
Violent clashes erupt between Bedouin tribesmen and police in an area of the Sinai peninsula near the Israeli border south of Gaza after a suspected Bedouin drug smuggler is killed in a shootout with police.
Police fire tear gas at some 2,000 rioters as they protest the shooting death of a bird seller who was mistaken for a drug dealer by an anti-drug police squad who had entered the wrong apartment.
Some 300 students protesting on the Cairo University campus against the blockade of the Gaza Strip are attacked by around 600 baton-wielding riot police who entered the campus despite a court ruling that bars police from university grounds.
Dozens of family members and supporters of nearly 50 people on trial for participating in deadly food riots in April 2008 gather outside the Tanta courtroom during the trial, chanting anti-government slogans and condemning the president.
Around 600 demonstrators, many of them rickshaw owners, protest in Alexandria after a motor rickshaw driver doused himself with fuel and set himself on fire to protest a traffic fine.
Over 100,000 protesters gather in a dozen Egyptian cities to denounce the Israeli air strikes in the Gaza Strip that killed some 1,400 Palestinians, including women and children.  Many of the protests were organized by the Muslim Brotherhood.
Thousands of drivers of articulated lorries go on strike to protest a law that would ban their vehicles by 2011; police arrest 25 truckers on the third day of the strike.
Pharmacists in many of the 45,000 privately owned drugstores across Egypt go on strike to protest efforts by authorities to enforce a new tax law.
A bomb explodes, targeting foreign tourists.  A French student is killed.  The suspects are al-Qaeda affiliated.
Violent clashes erupt between Muslims and Coptic Christians in the village of Damass after a Muslim man kills a Coptic Christian man whose son had allegedly sexually harassed a Muslim woman.
A group of Egyptian army cadets storm a police station in the industrial Cairo suburb of Helwan, injuring at least five policemen.  The attack came after the local police chief in Helwan arrested one of the cadets the night before for loitering
Hundreds of family members of victims of a 2006 ferry accident that killed over 1,000 people gather outside the courtroom to hear the verdict in the appeals trial of the wealthy owner of the ferry.
Dozens of Muslim villagers attack the homes of members of the Baha'i religion in the village of Shouraniya in southern Egypt, hurling firebombs and denouncing them as enemies of God.
Members of the Muslim Brotherhood call for a nationwide strike to take place on April 6 to demand democratic and economic reforms.
Egyptian police and armored cars charge into a crowd of around 1,000 irate pig farmers armed with stones and bottles, leaving 12 people injured.
A small bomb explodes near a church.
Nine European humanitarian aid workers go on hunger strike to protest Egypt's decision not to let them into the Gaza Strip.
Eighteen people are wounded and 35 arrested when clashes break out between Muslims and Christians in a village south of Cairo after a Coptic priest celebrated mass at his home.
A verbal exchange between a Muslim teenager and a Coptic Christian street vendor leads to the death of the Muslim teenager after a group of Coptic youths joins in the quarrel.
Thousands of angry mourners attend the funeral in Alexandria of a pregnant Egyptian woman who was stabbed to death in a courtroom in Dresden, Germany.
Thousands of angry mourners attend the funeral in Alexandria of a pregnant Egyptian woman who was stabbed to death in a courtroom in Dresden, Germany.
policemen were injured at seven protesters suffered from tear-gas inhalation; at least
Some 500 Muslims in the village of Hawasliya, near the southern town of Minya, trying to set fire to the home of a Coptic Christian after he announced plans to turn his house into a church.
Several dozen residents of the village of Ezba in the southern province of Sohag gather outside the Ezba municipal office to protest the suspected resettlement in Ezba of Baha'is who were forced to leave their homes in Shouraniya.
A Coptic Christian man is shot dead in his car in the village of Attaleen in southern Egypt over rumors that his son had taken intimate pictures of a Muslim girl the son had had an affair with and distributed the pictures by mobile phone and CD
A Coptic Christian man is shot dead in his car in the village of Attaleen in southern Egypt over rumors that his son had taken intimate pictures of a Muslim girl the son had had an affair with and distributed the pictures by mobile phone and CD
Twenty-five African migrants in a detention center for trying to enter Israel illegally launch a hunger strike to protest what they consider delays.
Four players for the Algerian national soccer team injured and one hospitalized when their bus is attacked by Egyptian soccer fans upon arrival in Cairo for a hotly contested World Cup qualifier.
A shootout between Egyptian police and angry Bedouins protesting the recent arrests of 12 fellow tribesmen, some on charges of smuggling and drug trafficking, leaves one Bedouin dead and four men wounded, including one police officer.
Hundreds of Muslim rioters in the town of Farshut in southern Egypt burn Coptic Christian-owned shops and attack a police station where they believed a Christian man accused of raping a Muslim girl was being held.
About 300 French protesters camp in front of the French embassy in Cairo to protest a ban on them from travelling from Egypt to Gaza for a pro-Palestinian protest march.
Activists block entrances to an Egyptian port, protesting its decision to ship goods through Israel.
Muslims open fire into a crowd of Christians in retaliation for the rape of a Muslim girl the preceding year.
protesters clash with police during an anti-wall building rally, killing one Egyptian guard.
Christians attack police cars during the funeral, claiming prejudice.
Muslims torch houses and shops belonging to Coptic Christians.
Citizens protest sectarian clashes, demanding security for all Egyptians.
Activists arrive to demonstrate support of victims of Coptic Christmas Eve shooting despite being banned by police.
Flood victims protest lack of government aid and are violently dispersed by police.
Muslims and Christians protest lack of rights to build churches and against sectarian strains in the country.
Opposition supporters hold an illegal rally welcoming the opposition candidate back to the country.
An Islamic extremist throws a suitcase with a makeshift bomb into Cairo's main synagogue.
Opposition supporter is detained and severely beaten by police after organizing a demonstration.
Women protest decision by the State Council to ban the appointment of female judges.
Muslim Brotherhood members protest Israeli plans to build Jewish settlements.
Muslims attack a community center and several homes owned by Christians.
An ElBaradei supporter goes on a hunger strike demanding the men who tortured him be arrested.
Muslims protest nationwide against Israeli planst to build Jewish settlements.
Civil servants camp out in front of parliament to demand better working conditions.
Citizens demand constitutional reforms and fair elections.
Women protest outside Kuwait embassy after many Egyptians are detained and deported.
Citizens protest police brutality and demand constitutional reform.
Coptic Christians attack police after a Muslim attempted to convert a Christian.
Citizens protest over parliament demands to fire on protesters.
Citizens demand government reform.
Opposition supporters protest the extension of the emergency law.
Farmers protest lack of water available for drinking and irrigation.
Citizens protest against a deadly Israeli raid on aid ships in Gaza.
Three police officers are wounded on election day in a shooting, allegedly from Muslim Brotherhood activists.
Christian Copts protest a court ruling that ordered their church to remarry divorced people.
Pro-Palestinian activists protest after being denied entry into Gaza.
Protesters hold marches against police brutality after police allegedly beat a man to death. Most are violently dispersed.
Christians protest after the wife of a Coptic priest goes missing, accusing Muslims of her abduction and forced conversion.
Christians protest after the wife of a Coptic priest goes missing, accusing Muslims of her abduction and forced conversion.
Human rights activists protest as the trial of two police accused of brutally killing a man begins.
Citizens protest power cuts during Ramadan.
Factory workers assault a manger and after a gas pipe that wasn't replaced exploded and killed one.
Muslims protest negative statements made by a Coptic official about the Quran.
Muslims protest outside a mosque against negative statements made about the Quran.
Supporters of candidates who didn't make the election ballot protest.
Muslims torch houses belonging to Coptic Christians after rumors that a Christian had an affair with a Muslim girl.
Muslim Brotherhood supporters hold rallies and police arrest hundreds.
A mob attacks a Muslim Brotherhood official after he alleged that the election would be a sham.
Police forcibly stop Christians from building a church, killing one.
Christians riot and attack police and local buildings after police kill a Christian.
Protesters march against police brutality.
The son of an independent candidate is stabbed to death while putting up posters for his father.
Muslim Brotherhood supporters protest and in some locations bomb polling stations.
Citizens protest widespread fraud in elections.
Opposition supporters boycott runoff elections in protest of fraud.
Citizens protest vote rigging in recent elections.
A car explodes in front of a Coptic church in Alexandria, killing 7.  After the blast, enraged Christians emerge from the church and clash with police and then storm a nearby mosque.  Several days of Christian riots and protests follow.
A car explodes in front of a Coptic church in Alexandria, killing 7.  After the blast, enraged Christians emerge from the church and clash with police and then storm a nearby mosque.  Several days of Christian riots and protests follow.
A car explodes in front of a Coptic church in Alexandria, killing 7.  After the blast, enraged Christians emerge from the church and clash with police and then storm a nearby mosque.  Several days of Christian riots and protests follow.
An off-duty policeman boards a train and opens fire on Christians.  Riots and protests by Christians follow.
Arab Spring.  A man self-immolates in front of the Egyptian parliament.  Another self-immolates in Alexandria.  This is the first such event in Egypt following the revolution in Tunisia.
Arab Spring.  A man self-immolates in front of the Egyptian parliament.  Another self-immolates in Alexandria.  This is the first such event in Egypt following the revolution in Tunisia.
Arab Spring.  The 2011 Egyptian Revolution.  An uprising triggered by lack of jobs, food prices, and authoritarianism.  The uprising features marches, riots, sit-ins, and strikes.  Police and military forces respond with deadly force.
Arab Spring.  Mass prison escapes occur during the revolution.  Soldiers arrest or kill a large number of the escapees.
Arab Spring.  Major violence breaks out between pro- and anti-Mobarak protesters in Cairo's Tahrir Square.
A bomb explodes at a gas terminal, causing a massive fire.
Assailants detonate a bomb in an empty church.
Unknown attackers fire a rocket at police barracks.  Clashes erupt.
State employees strike and protest for better pay.
Hundreds of thousands celebrate the fall of Mubarak.
Hundreds of secret police march to protest against their superiors, who ordered them to shoot at civilian demonstrators.
1500 Suez Canal workers strike.
Over a quarter million protesters fill Tahrir Square to pressure the military regime to implement reform, while hundreds of thousands march in Alexandria.
Over a quarter million protesters fill Tahrir Square to pressure the military regime to implement reform, while hundreds of thousands march in Alexandria.
Hundreds of activists protest at the Arab League to denounce the repression used against the uprising in Libya.
Copts riot and clash with Muslim shop owners after a priest is found dead in his home.
Tens of thousands march against the regime.
Villagers protest against the government.  They demand government reform and accuse bakers of selling subsidized flour on the black market.
Guards shoot two during a prison riot after videos surface showing the head of security claiming that security forces were still the 'masters' of the country.
Protesters celebrate the military's choice for Prime Minister.
Hundreds of protesters attempt to storm state security headquarters.
Muslims attack Christians protesting the burning of a church.
Attackers armed with knives wade into hundreds of pro-democracy activists on Tahrir Square.  Accusations later surface that soldiers and thugs subjected female protesters to 'virginity tests.'
Islamists hurl stones and shoes at Mohamed ElBaradei during a referendum on constitutional amendments.
Police officers set fire to the interior ministry in a protest over low pay.
Thousands protest to demand that former president Hosni Mubarak and members of his regime be brought to trial.
Thousands of football fans invade a pitch.
Protests demanding the removal of the military council governing Egypt.  Overnight, soldiers raid the protest camp.
Islamists block railway tracks, occupy a government building, block roads, and so forth to protest the appointment of a Christian governor to the majority Muslim province.
Saboteurs bomb an Egyptian gas pipeline that carries gas into Israel and Jordan.
Civil society organizations and labor unions held a protest against the government
300 Islamists rally to protest the US killing of Osama bin Laden.
Muslims and Christians fight in the streets over rumors of a mixed romance.  Churches are attacked and firebombed.
Christians stage a weeklong sit-in in front of government building to protest sectarian violence.  A mob of Muslims attacks them at the urging of a Salafi sect.
Over 1000 activists rally against religious violence.
Protesters demonstrate in front of the Israeli embassy on the 63rd anniversary of that state's formation.
Thousands of people rally to call for unity and the rule of law to be enforced after attacks on churches.
Thousands protest in Tahrir Square, calling for  'second revolution.'
Rioters attack a police station after a bus driver is killed by police.
Security forces clash with around 3000 rock throwing protesters in Tahrir Square.  Many of the protesters are family members of those killed during the February revolution.
Protesters converge on Tahrir Square in pro-democracy demonstrations.
Saboteurs bomb a gas pipeline that carries supplies to Israel and Jordan.
Hundreds of Egyptians attack a courtroom, scuffle with guards, and block a highway after a court orders the release of 10 police charged with killing protesters.
Thousands of people in cities around the nation push for democratic change.  Clashes erupt in Suez.  Sit-ins and protests continue across the country daily.  Protesters camp in Tahrir Square until cleared out by the army on August 1.
Pro-regime thugs attack protesters in Tahrir Square.  Riots erupt between pro- and anti- regime protesters.
Salamis and other Islamists fill Tahrir Square to demand implementation of strict Islamic law.
Sectarian clashes erupt after a Copt on a motorcycle hits a Muslim pedestrian.
Several hundred people rally in Tahrir Square in favor of a 'civil state.'
Protesters clash with police in Tahrir Square.
Military forces raid suspected militant cells.
Backers and foes of Mubarak clash outside of the court in which his trial is set.
A football riot occurs.
Protesters storm the Israeli embassy.  Troops defending the embassy shoot dead three people.
Workers at the Suez Canal's southern port initiate a strike action.
Teachers protest outside cabinet headquarters to demand better pay.  They then initiate a strike.
Saboteurs bomb a gas pipeline that carries supplies to Israel and Jordan.
Security official raid the Al Jazzier office, roughing up its staff and detaining an editor.
Thousands protest, demanding an end to emergency laws.
Muslim rioters burn down a church.
Copts protest outside the state TV building after the burning of a church in Marina.  They also demand that the police release a jailed blogger.
Air traffic controllers stage a work slowdown.
Massive clashes erupt between Copts angry over a recent church attack, Muslims, and security forces.
Copts protest outside a hospital where the injured from the 10/9/2011 riots were taken.
Muslims and Christians march in a show of religious unity.
The judge's union strikes to decry 'bullying' by lawyers.
Security forces strike and protest to demand the 'cleaning' of corruption in their institution and better pay.  Police storm security headquarters and bust up the picket lines.
A fight erupts in a cemetery between youths of opposing villages.  Families of the youths become involved, and soon the conflict erupts into a battle between residents of both villages.
A fight erupts in a cemetery between youths of opposing villages.  Families of the youths become involved, and soon the conflict erupts into a battle between residents of both villages.
A Canadian tourist is killed when he is caught up in the cross-fire of two feuding families.
Saboteurs explode two bombs at a pipeline that ships supplies to Israel and Jordan.
Hundreds of Muslims and Christians march in a show of religious unity.
Riot police fire tear gas and rubber bullets in an effort to clear out a protester tent camp on Tahrir Square.  Several days of riots follow.
Riot police fire tear gas and rubber bullets in an effort to clear out a protester tent camp on Tahrir Square.  Several days of riots follow.
Tens of thousands of Islamists gather on Tahrir Square to protest plans by generals to give themselves special powers over a future elected government.
Police battle militants.
A protester is killed when riots and protests resume on Tahrir Square.
Sectarian clashes occur after a Muslim is killed by a Christian, sparking a cycle of revenge riots.
Militants are observed bombing the pipeline that carries gas to Israel and Jordan.
Protesters attempt to clear Tahrir Square of street vendors, who fight back with hurled stones and hired thugs.
Sit-ins escalate to clashes between soldiers and anti-military protesters.  Several days of riots follow.
Saboteurs bomb a gas pipeline that carries supplies to Israel and Jordan.
Around 10,000 women march to demand that the military council step down in a show of outrage after soldiers abused women in a crackdown on activists earlier in the week.
Sectarian clashes erupt after a Christian students posts a drawing of the Prophet on the Facebook.  The fighting spreads to three unnamed villages.  The police repulse Muslim protesters with tear gas.
protesters held vigil outside of courthouse to remember victims of 2011 church bombing, demand resignation of Atty Gen.
Four Protesters handing out leaflets that called for a January 25th protest of the new regime's refusal to relinquish power.
Residents threw chairs at Shafiq and demanded he leave the area, scuffles broke out between his supporters and opponents.
Protesters demonstrated against the military regime
Violence erupted at a campaign rally for Egypt's former prime minister, now running for president. Protesters threw chairs at the presidential hopeful, and fights broke out between Shafiq's supporters and his foes.
Protesters in Cairo and Suez decried the military's refusal to punish those responsible for killing civilian Protesters in last year's uprising.
Protesters in Cairo and Suez decried the military's refusal to punish those responsible for killing civilian Protesters in last year's uprising.
Families of victims of killings during uprising against Mubarak protested generals manipulation of courts to get acquttals.
Families of victims of killings during uprising against Mubarak protested generals manipulation of courts to get acquttals.
Thugs attacked protesters and burned tents in the square in attempt to clear it out before anniversary of uprising.
Protesters camped out in Tahrir Square were assaulted by supporters of the military regime, who beat them and set fire to their tents.
Supporters of Mubarak chanted slogans in support, nearly clashed with relatives of victims of government violence.
Thousands rallied in Tahrir Square in lead-up to anniversary of revolution.
Activists marched on Tahrir Square, Parliament, Defense buildings, and the headquarters of State TV during the one-year anniversary of the revolution, calling for the military to relinquish control of the government and state media, stop military trials of civilian dissenters, and punish those responsible for civilian deaths. On the 27th, minor scuffles broke out between the Muslim Brotherhood and Protesters, but no serious injuries were reported.
Citizens protesting the military, Muslim Brotherhood, legitimacy of legislature demonstrated outside Parliament during 1st day of newly elected body.
Both Islamists and liberals took part in demonstrations across Egypt to mark anniversary of revolution and call for end of military rule.
More than 1500 Copts gathered to protest killing of fellow Copts Muwaad Hassaad and his son in nearby town.
Assailants shot and killed Coptic Christian Hassaad and his son.
Activists demonstrated outside of embassy before storming it in response to violence in Syria, Syrian opposition also set up tent in Tahrir Square.
Muslim Brotherhood supporters and secular and leftist activists clashed
Muslim residents attacked home and shops of Copt Guirguis after rumors that he had affair with Muslim woman.
Syrian activists stormed the Syrian Embassy in Cairo in response to the rising violence in Syria, breaking down the gates and tearing down the national flag.
Muslim villagers attacked the homes and shops of a Coptic man's family after news that he had had an affair with a Muslim woman. Eight Coptic families were later evicted from the village.
protesters prayed on Cairo bridge that was site of killing of protesters by security forces the previous year.
Hundreds blocked roads leading to a popular tourist destination in protest of lax security after a robbery led to the death of a French tourist.
Citizens blocked a road leading to market to protest lack of security after tourist killed by gunfire from robbery.
25 Chinese road workers were captured and held as part of the Bedouins' demands to free several of their captured comrades and stop natural gas sales to Israel. However, the workers were released the next day.
Bedouins captured 25 Chinese workers to demand release of detained Islamist relatives.
Protesters gathered in front of Parliament, calling on lawmakers to press the ruling military officials to speed up the transfer of power, and hold real trials for those who used violence against activists. Violence erupted between the Protesters and supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood.
protesters demanding end of military rule were blocked by backers of Muslim Brotherhood when attempting to reach Parliament.
Fans of Al-Masry soccer team rushed field and chased visiting team and fans after victory, resulting in clashes and stampede that killed 74. Riot police reportedly stood idle during riot.
Fans of two prominent football clubs erupted into violence after a game, killing dozens and wounding many more.
Fans set fire to soccer stadium in Cairo after match called off due to soccer violence in Port Said.
Peaceful march by citizens escalated to riots and clashes with security forces to protest failure of police to stop soccer riot previous day, criticized police, and called for military regime to step down.
Peaceful march by citizens escalated to riots and clashes with security forces to protest failure of police to stop soccer riot previous day, criticized police, and called for military regime to step down.
Peaceful march by citizens escalated to riots and clashes with security forces to protest failure of police to stop soccer riot previous day, criticized police, and called for military regime to step down.
Peaceful march by citizens escalated to riots and clashes with security forces to protest failure of police to stop soccer riot previous day, criticized police, and called for military regime to step down.
Peaceful march by citizens escalated to riots and clashes with security forces to protest failure of police to stop soccer riot previous day, criticized police, and called for military regime to step down.
Thousands angry over the lack of police intervention in yesterday's football violence marched on the capital and in Port Said and Suez, demanding the ouster of Field Marshall Hussein Tantawi. Several Protesters died from gunshot wounds or inhaling tear gas.
Thousands angry over the lack of police intervention in yesterday's football violence marched on the capital and in Port Said and Suez, demanding the ouster of Field Marshall Hussein Tantawi. Several Protesters died from gunshot wounds or inhaling tear gas.
Thousands angry over the lack of police intervention in yesterday's football violence marched on the capital and in Port Said and Suez, demanding the ouster of Field Marshall Hussein Tantawi. Several Protesters died from gunshot wounds or inhaling tear gas.
Bedouins abducted Americans at gunpoint to demand release of fellow tribesman arrested by authorities.
Armed Bedouins boarded a tour bus in Sinai, robbing the passengers and kidnapping three to bargain for the release of two of their children who were imprisoned on drug charges. The prisoners were released a few hours later.
Saboteurs blew up pipeline that supplies gas to Israel and Jordan, attack came day after Islamist leader suspected of previous attacks died in prison cell.
Masked gunmen detonated explosives on a pipeline used to transport oil to Israel.
Bedouin kidnapped two police officers and 17 conscripts after a tribesman was shot and killed by police. They were released after police forces agreed to compensate the slain man's family and label him a martyr.
Tribesman briefly kidnapped 19 border guards before releasing them to protest killing of one of their members.
Tribesman kidnapped 3 Korean women and their guide to demand release of Salim Oda, who was arrested previous day for bank robberry.
Citizens demonstrated outside of the defense ministry to demand the transfer of power to civilian authority.
Three Korean women and their tour guide were abducted by armed tribesmen, who used them as bargaining chips to force the release of a comrade arrested trying to rob a bank.
Students carried photos of protesters killed in clashes with security forces to protest regime.
Youth groups nationwide called for a general strike on the anniversary of Mubarak's fall, hoping to convince the military to relinquish power. Few turned out in support, however.
General strike called to pressure military rules to transfer power to civilian rule, only adhered to by universities and factories.
Ultras marched to demand justice for dozens killed in stadium riot, claim police failed to prevent violence.
Supporters of the Al-Ahly football club marched on Cairo, demanding justice for those killed in the Port Said violence.
Thousands gathered around the Syrian embassy to demand authorities expel the Syrian embassador in response to the violent crackdown on dissent in Syria.
Abdolfotoh was beaten and had vehicle stolen upon returning from campaign event.
al-Brince was driving when large truck rammed into him and sped off, al-Brince chairs committee dealing with location of Mubarak's detention.
Hardline Islamists protested at a trial of American NGO associates. They demanded a trade between cleric Omar Abdel Rahman, who was jailed by the US government on terrorism charges, and the American nationals (if convicted.)
Islamists staged protest outside trial of democracy activists (including Americans) holding banner of Egyptian cleric convicted of terrorism in U.S.
Militants attacked gas pipeline that transports fuel to Israel and Jordan with two explosions.
Unknown attackers planted and detonated two bombs on pipelines sending gas to Israel.
Armed Bedouins besieged peace force in attempt to press for freedom of fellow Bedouins facing retrial for terrorism, set up barricades preventing soldiers from leaving.
Pro-military protesters demonstrating outside U.S. Embassy to support crackdown on democracy groups threw rocks at marching anti-military protesters.
Civilian groups, one demanding expulsion of US ambassador, clashed in front of embassy.
Two hundred Protesters marking the anniversary of the brutal military oppression of a 2011 protest were assaulted by pro-government citizens, who threw rocks at them.
Three hundred Bedouins surrounded a camp of peacekeeping forces in a show of strength designed to draw attention to the upcoming trials of several tribesmen accused of terrorism. They left after the Egyptian military agreed to look into their demands.
Robbers attacked group of villagers, exchanged fire with police and took hostages.
Family vendetta left 5 dead, buildings and warehouses set on fire.
Fans staged sit-in outside office of prosecutor to protest delay in filing charges in soccer riot case.
Al-Ahly football fans staged a sit-in outside the offices of the nation's top prosecutor to protest the delay in justice for February 1st's football violence.
Al-Ahly fans marched to demand justice for comrades killed in soccer riot and restructuring of interior ministry, protested military regime.
Farmers have thrown dead cows in front of governors' offices to protest incompetence in handling foot-and-mouth disease in cattle.
Public transportation crippled by weeklong strike during period of massive gasoline shortages.
The public transportation industry went on a lengthy strike, likely related to soaring gas prices.
Bedouins kidnapped 2 Brazilian tourists, officials believe in demand for release of jailed tribesmen. Tourists released hours later.
Bedouins kidnapped two Brazilian tourists to negotiate for the freedom of an arrested tribesman. The tourists were released hours later.
Screaming worshippers of Shenouda rushed lines of military police protecting monastery where he was buried.
Scuffles and knife fights broke out between drivers frustrated with gas shortages, some fired guns in the air.
Citizens and football fans in Port Said rallied together to protest what they say as the unfair treatment of the workers there and their football club. The protest turned violent, and one boy was shot and killed- causing the violence to escalate quickly.
Citizens set fire to tires, blocked roads to protest suspension of soccer team after stadium riot the previous month.
Men driving ATVs crossed into Israel, upon returning to Egypt exchanged fire with security forces.
Citizens demonstrated to protest Islamists' domination of assembly created to draft constitution and to call for its dissolution, and authorities slowness in prosecuting suspects of soccer riot case.
Muslim Brotherhood youth members called for the dismissal of Kamal Ganzuri, head of the ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces.
After the military erected walls blocking off the popular protest site of Tahrir Square, an organization of graffiti artists painted the concrete to appear as if the street was still open. The next day, one of the walls was torn down by anti-military activists.
Activists chanting anti-military slogans tore down wall erected to end clashes with protesters.
Supporters of Abu Ismail demonstrated to protest his exclusion from presidential race due to mother's US nationality.
Citizens marched on Tahrir Square to protest the disqualification of Salafistst presidential candidate Hazem Abu Ismail, who was banned based on his mother's US citizenship.
Supporters of Suleiman marched to urge his candidacy for the presidency.
Unknown attackers planted and detonated explosives on the pipeline to Israel, which was still out of comission from the last bombing.
Militants blew up gas pipeline that carries fuel to Israel and Jordan.
Citizens demonstrated to protest Islamist control of commission tasked with drafting constitution.
Citizens blocked road to Libya to protest restrictions on crossing border and increased tariffs, led to clashes with security forces.
One hundred and fifty Protesters gathered outside the State Council to protest Muslims' disproportionate role on the dragting of the new constitution.
Citizens of a small border town blocked the border road in protest of increased tariffs and harsher security restrictions on cross-border traffic. Police intervened and two were killed in the ensuing fights.
Supporters of Abu Ismail camped outside of courthouse waiting for decision regarding his eligibility as presidential candidate.
Citizens demonstrated to demand that former Mubarak regime officials be banned from upcoming presidential election.
Islamists swarmed Tahrir Square to decry the presidential candidates they saw as extensions of the old Mubarak regime.
Presidential candidate Abu Ismail and his supporters camped outside  the election commission's headquarters in response to his pending ejection from the race. When his ejection was confirmed, several scuffled with military police.
Islamic militants opened fire on a police checkpoint, killing two and wounding a third.
Gunmen opened fire on police checkpoint, killing 2 policemen.
Saudi ambassador filed police report against protesters from youth group, accusing them of sabotaging embassy during protest.
Supporters of Abu Ismail staged a sit-in outside election commission headquarters to protest his disqualification from presidential election.
Hundreds of activists blocked the Oct. 6 bridge over the Nile in protest of the continued military rule and the council's disqualification of several leading candidates.
Demonstrators blocked main bridge over the Nile to call for end to military rule.
Both Islamist and secular citizens packed Tahrir Square to call for end of military rule, accusing regime of manipulating elections to maintain power.
Thousands of Protesters crowded Tahrir Square to decry the continuation of military rule and the host of presidential candidates who were once part of the Mubarak regime.
Rights activists demonstrated outside Saudi Embassy and consulates in other cities to demand release of Egyptian rights lawyer Ahmed el-Gazewi.
Rights activists staged a protest in front of the Saudi Arabian embassy and Egypt's Foreign Ministry, calling for the release of a rights lawyer arrested in Saudi Arabia. Others in Suez blocked the path of embassy workers as they tried to leave.
Rights activists staged a protest in front of the Saudi Arabian embassy and Egypt's Foreign Ministry, calling for the release of a rights lawyer arrested in Saudi Arabia. Others in Suez blocked the path of embassy workers as they tried to leave.
Rights activists demonstrated outside Saudi Embassy and consulates in other cities to demand release of Egyptian rights lawyer Ahmed el-Gazewi.
Islamists demonstrated in Tahrir Square, calling for members  of the Mubarak regime to be excised from the presidential race.
Islamists demonstrated and held sit-in protest in Tahrir Square to demand that Mubarak regime officials be banned from presidential election and protest concern that military may rig election.
Citizens have been camped outside Defense Ministry to demand end of military rule.
Citizens demonstrated outside of Foreign Ministry to demand ambassador to Saudi Arabia be questioned over handling of case of arrested rights lawyer in Saudi Arabia.
Unknown assailants attacked Islamists protesting peacefully outside the Defense Ministry. It was hours before police forces intervened.
Citizens demonstrated to protest regime's failure to heed calls for dismissal of government, clashed with assailants supporting the military.
Salafiststs on their way to a protest were attacked by residents of a Cairo neighborhood. Over a hundred were injured and one was killed.
Parliament suspended sessions for a week to protest military's failure to heed calls for dismissal of government.
Army supporters attacked Islamist protesters, violence attracted other factions who joined in protests.
Soldier killed when gunmen open fire at Rafah checkpoint close to Gaza-Sinai border.
Human Rights Watch claims that protesters, both men and women, were beaten and tortured after being arrested during demonstrations.
A mixed group of Protesters called for an end to military rule outside the Ministry of Defence. The protest escalated into violence after a few youths threw rocks at the military police outside, who responded with water cannons and tear gas. A smaller group in Suez threw rocks at the governor's office. 300 Protesters were ultimately detained.
A mixed group of Protesters called for an end to military rule outside the Ministry of Defence. The protest escalated into violence after a few youths threw rocks at the military police outside, who responded with water cannons and tear gas. A smaller group in Suez threw rocks at the governor's office. 300 Protesters were ultimately detained.
Citizens demonstrated in multiple locations in Cairo and Suez to demand faster transition to civilian rule, one soldier killed in clashes between civilians and troops.
Citizens demonstrated in multiple locations in Cairo and Suez to demand faster transition to civilian rule, one soldier killed in clashes between civilians and troops.
Citizens demonstrated in multiple locations in Cairo and Suez to demand faster transition to civilian rule, one soldier killed in clashes between civilians and troops. Also reported that journalists were attacked by soldiers.
Women accused security forces of sexual assault during crackdown on demonstrations as they were taken into custody.
Hundreds of riot police stormed out of Cairo and blocked a major road after reports that an officer had executed a conscript. Military forces were sent to quell the protest.
Bedouins briefly seized peacekeepers to seek release of Bedouin prisoners held by government.
Riot police blocked highway out of Cairo after hearing rumor that one of their members was killed by an officer.
Bedouins kidnapped 10 Fijians from the peacekeeping force sent to monitor Egypt and Israel, demanding the release of several Bedouin prisoners. The hostages were released the same day after local government agreed.
Soldier found shot dead in suspected revenge attack.
Citizens detained in demonstrations engaged in hunger strike to protest continued detention.
Prisoners jailed during recent violence went on a hunger strike to protest the use of military courts to try civilians. Free citizens also staged a symbolic, 24-hour hunger strike to show their solidarity.
Activists held 24-hour hunger strike to support detainees engaging in hunger strike and protest use of military courts to try civilians.
Citizens gathered at Journalists Union to show support for  those detained in military roundup following demonstrations.
Citizens camped out in Tahrir Square to demonstrate against the military regime.
Protesters mobbed Ahmed Shafiq, presidential candidate and previously a member of the Mubarak regime, as he tried to vote. The candidate had to be escorted away by security.
Final day of presidential election saw violence between supporters of candidates Shafiq, Morsi, and Amr Moussa.
Demonstrators chanted slogans against military rulers, both presidential candidates, and demanded implementation of law barring former Mubarak officials from running for president.
Mob attacked then set fire to headquarters of Shafiq after announcement that he would be in runoff for presidency then threw leaflets in streeet in Tahrir Square, Shafiq supporters responded by gathering outside and demonstrating against Muslim Brotherhood.
Supporters of defeated candidates Khaled Ali and Hamdeen Sabahi gathered to decry the military and Muslim Brotherhood.
Supporters of defeated candidates Khaled Ali and Hamdeen Sabahi gathered to decry the military and Muslim Brotherhood.
Supporters of defeated candidates Khaled Ali and Hamdeen Sabahi gathered to decry the military and Muslim Brotherhood.
Supporters of defeated candidates Khaled Ali and Hamdeen Sabahi gathered to decry the military and Muslim Brotherhood.
Hundreds ransacked presidential candidate Ahmed Shafiq's campaign headquarters, setting the building on fire. A few days later his offices in two provincial towns were also attacked.
Hundreds ransacked presidential candidate Ahmed Shafiq's campaign headquarters, setting the building on fire. A few days later his offices in two provincial towns were also attacked.
Hundreds ransacked presidential candidate Ahmed Shafiq's campaign headquarters, setting the building on fire. A few days later his offices in two provincial towns were also attacked.
Demonstrators burned Shafiq and Morsi posters, protested against military rule, and tried to attack campaign offices of Shafiq and Morsi in several locations.
Demonstrators burned Shafiq and Morsi posters, protested against military rule, and tried to attack campaign offices of Shafiq and Morsi in several locations.
Demonstrators burned Shafiq and Morsi posters, protested against military rule, and tried to attack campaign offices of Shafiq and Morsi in several locations.
Bedouins kidnapped 2 American tourists to demand release of tribesman held by security forces, tourists later released.
Bedouins kidnapped and held two American tourists until  a tribesman indicted on drug charges was released.
Opponents of presidential candidate Ahmed Shaqif rallied in several provinces to call for his disqualification from the election, due to having been part of the Mubarak regime.
Demonstrators set fire to part of the Syrian Embassy.
Demonstrators protested to demand that Shafiq be disqualified from runoff, others rallied against both candidates as well as military rulers.
Street protests (including Morsi) occurred after Mubarak and sons were acquitted of corruption charges and acquittal of six police chiefs, some protests descended into scuffles with pro-Mubarak protesters after initial jubiliation regarding conviction of killing protesters.
Street protests (including Morsi) occurred after Mubarak and sons were acquitted of corruption charges and acquittal of six police chiefs, some protests descended into scuffles with pro-Mubarak protesters after initial jubiliation regarding conviction of killing protesters.
Street protests (including Morsi) occurred after Mubarak and sons were acquitted of corruption charges and acquittal of six police chiefs, some protests descended into scuffles with pro-Mubarak protesters after initial jubiliation regarding conviction of killing protesters.
Citizens of many political affiliations joined to protest the acquital of several of Mubarak's aides and two of his sons- who were thought to be complicit in violent acts. Most were nonviolent but clashes erupted outside the courtroom.
Citizens of many political affiliations joined to protest the acquital of several of Mubarak's aides and two of his sons- who were thought to be complicit in violent acts. Most were nonviolent but clashes erupted outside the courtroom.
Citizens of many political affiliations joined to protest the acquital of several of Mubarak's aides and two of his sons- who were thought to be complicit in violent acts. Most were nonviolent but clashes erupted outside the courtroom.
Citizens of many political affiliations joined to protest the acquital of several of Mubarak's aides and two of his sons- who were thought to be complicit in violent acts. Most were nonviolent but clashes erupted outside the courtroom.
Offices of Shafiq were attacked in several cities, with attackers pillaging and burning buildings.
Citizens demonstrated in Tahrir Square to condemn verdicts of Hosni Mubarak trial.
Nearly 200 men assaulted woman in Tahrir Square before being chased away.
Citizens demonstrated to mark 2 year anniversary of police killing of Khaled Said, who became protest symbol.
Citizens demonstrated to mark 2 year anniversary of police killing of Khaled Said, who became protest symbol.
Citizens demonstrated to mark 2 year anniversary of police killing of Khaled Said, who became protest symbol.
Citizens demonstrated to mark 2 year anniversary of police killing of Khaled Said, who became protest symbol.
A protest march decrying widespread violence towards women was attacked and several women who were part of the protest were sexually assaulted.
Citizens demonstrated to demand that Shafiq be banned from election and against verdicts in Mubarak trial.
Citizens demonstrated to demand that Shafiq be banned from election and against verdicts in Mubarak trial.
Citizens demonstrated to demand that Shafiq be banned from election and against verdicts in Mubarak trial.
Women marching in Tahrir Square to end sexual harassment were assaulted by a mob of hundreds of men.
Activists went on hunger strike to demand the disqualification of Ahmed Shafiq from election.
Liberals boycotted session of parliament to protest alleged Islamist domination of constitutional panel.
Policemen killed when militants open fire at checkpoint.
Youth group demonstrated in Tahrir Square to protest military rule and possible election of candidate Ahmed Shafiq, and tore down Shafiq poster and had cars drive over it.
Brotherhood supporters camped/demonstrated in Tahrir Square to protest miitary regime decision formally stripping office of president of many powers in attempt to maintain power and potential election results, supporters of Shafiq also demonstrated in streets.
Brotherhood supporters camped/demonstrated in Tahrir Square to protest miitary regime decision formally stripping office of president of many powers in attempt to maintain power and potential election results, supporters of Shafiq also demonstrated in streets.
Brotherhood supporters camped/demonstrated in Tahrir Square to protest miitary regime decision formally stripping office of president of many powers in attempt to maintain power and potential election results, supporters of Shafiq also demonstrated in streets.
Bedouins briefly kidnapped tourist to demand release of tribesman arrested for drug possession.
Activists demonstrated court ruling dissolving Islamist-led Parliament.
Bedouins kidnapped a tourist from Singapore and held him for several hours, demanding the release of a tribesman arrested on drug charges.
Thousands gathered in Tahrir Square, Alexandria, and outside Parliament  to protest the military's seizure of power, specifically the last-minute controls placed on any new constitution. The Tahrir Square protests turned into a long-running sit-in protest.
Thousands gathered in Tahrir Square, Alexandria, and outside Parliament  to protest the military's seizure of power, specifically the last-minute controls placed on any new constitution. The Tahrir Square protests turned into a long-running sit-in protest.
In other Cairo neighborhoods, supporters of presidential candidate Ahmed Shafiq protested Muslim rule.
Citizens of a small town reacted with violence after two local musicians were killed by (allegedly) conservative Salafists, burning down a suspect's house, destroying a charity building one of the suspects worked at, and holding up traffic and railway shipments.
Men ordered couple to separate because they weren't married, argument broke out leading to stabbing of student.
Citizens aired grievances as demonstrators were allowed into presidential palace to demand solutions directly from President.
Activists at the presidential palace pressured  new President Morsi to release political detainees, filming a news conference outside.
Members of the textile, tire, and cement industries went to the presidential palace to demand better contracts, and working conditions.
Lawyers and police fought outside a Cairo station. The next day, lawyers pledged to not represent police until the offending officer was brought up on charges of assault, and staged a sit-in.
Women spoke out against the huge number of sexual harassment cases reported in Cairo.
Women demonstrated in Tahrir Square to protest against sexual violence.
Lawyers and policemen clashed in police station after confrontation between a lawyer and policeman, a dozen were injured.
Lawyers demonstrated outside police station after clashes between police and lawyers previous day, demanding criminal charges against officers.
Parliament opened a largely symbolic meeting in defiance of court's ruling to disband chamber.
Citizens demonstrated in pro-Morsi rally against ruling of courts regarding dissolution of Parliament.
Morsi supporters gathered in Tahrir Square to protest the military's continued abuse of power, and the Judiciary's attempts to support this by ruling that the defunct Parliament could not be reconvened.
Bedouin man kidnapped tourists and guide to demand release of his jailed uncle.
Bedouins captured two American tourists and their guide, demanding the release of a tribesman. The hostages were released a few days later.
Textile workers went on strike to demand higher wages and protest manager reneging on promise of a bonus.
 in reaction to suspicions that US helped Muslim Brotherhood win elections.
Opponents of the Muslim Brotherhood pelted US Secretary of State Clinton's motorcade with shoes and tomatoes, believing the Unisted States to have interfered with the election.
Textile workers went on strike after a promised bonus failed to materialize.
Supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood protested the potential for the judiciary to take control of the new constitution away from them.
Islamists protested outside courtroom regarding legality of Muslim Brotherhood appointed panel to decide upon constitution over concerns with legacy of former regime.
Passengers angry over long waiting periods blocked a train's path with debris, causing it to derail and hit another train. Four were injured.
Passengers who became impatient waiting for train put logs and rocks on track, causing 2 trains to collide.
Hundreds stormed the Syrian embassy, trying to raise the green flag of the country's rebels.
Hospital workers were attacked after they could not provide some services, leading to several hospitals going on strike.
Hospital workers were attacked after they could not provide some services, leading to several hospitals going on strike.
protesters tried to storm Syrian Embassy to raise flag of Syria's rebels.
Men armed with knives and machetes attacked hospital workers and guards, an event that has occurred nearly daily in multiple cities most by people angry over lack of services.
Men armed with knives and machetes attacked hospital workers and guards, an event that has occurred nearly daily in multiple cities most by people angry over lack of services.
Militants shot to death 2 soldiers who were walking on foot near border with Gaza Strip.
Islamic  militants shot and killed two soldiers in a small town in Sinai.
Angry residents of a poor Giza neighborhood stormed the Governor's office, demanding reparations after electrical and water services failed.
Militants blew up gas pipeline that transports fuel to Israel and Jordan, Bedouins believed to be behind series of attacks on pipelines.
Unknown attackers bombed the pipeline delivering gas to Israel and Jordan.
Doctors in several cities closed down hospitals in protest over police failure to protect them from attacks.
Doctors in several cities closed down hospitals in protest over police failure to protect them from attacks.
Muslim and Christian villagers threw firebombs at each other, Christian homes set ablaze after Christian laundry worker burnt a Muslim's shirt. 1 later died from firebomb wounds.
Muslims and Christians clashed after a Coptic laundry worker singed a Muslim man's shirt. Fire bombs were traded and several houses  and businesses caught aflame. As the attacks worsened, 100 christian families fled.
After a power plant boiler exploded, knocking out power in two provinces, angry residents fired guns in the air and blocked railroad tracks.
After a power plant boiler exploded, knocking out power in two provinces, angry residents fired guns in the air and blocked railroad tracks.
Following death of Muslim man in earlier clash, Muslims tried to set fire to local church and damaged property, causing all local Christians to flee.
Authorities arrested, beat, tortured, and tried children as adults during protests.
After reports that a policeman harassed a woman, armed villagers attacked the police station. One attacker was killed and several were wounded.
Several workers trying to get back pay from a hotel were kept out with force, one being shot by a policeman. A larger crowd returned later and firebombed the building and surrounding cars.
Gunmen in Bedouin attire backed by mortar fire from Gaza Strip killed soldiers at border checkpoint before driving into Israel, 16 soldiers killed.
Militants attacked guards at an Egypt-Israel border station, killing sixteen and stealing two vehicles which they drove into Israel.
Militants attacked guards at an Egypt-Israel border station, killing sixteen and stealing two vehicles which they drove into Israel.
Two attacks were made on shrine of local Muslim saint after whom the town is named.
Helicopters carried out missile strikes against militants in offensive to counter attacks in the territory.
Gunmen opened fire at 3 security checkpoints around El-Arish at Israeli border.
Helicopters carried out missile strikes against militants in offensive to counter attacks in the territory.
Helicopters carried out missile strikes against militants in offensive to counter attacks in the territory.
Helicopters carried out missile strikes against militants in offensive to counter attacks in the territory.
Hecklers disrupted the state funerals for the soldiers killed in the border attack two days prior, shouting anti-Morsi slogans. Some tossed shoes at officials in attendance, in a sign of disrespect.
At military funeral for slain police, Morsi opponents tried to assault Prime Minister and chanted anti-Brotherhood slogans.
Journalists called partial strike including running blank columns in protest after parliament named 50 new editors for state-owned newspapers, including several with Islamist leanings.
Brotherhood supporters stormed TV complex, attacking journalists and smashing cars to punish media critics of Morsi.
Gunmen fired on a police station, possibly in response to the recent military strikes in Sinai.
Three indpendent newspapers went on strike to protest the replacement of current state news editors with those who would be more sympathetic to the Muslim Brotherhood. They also marched, briefly.
Gunmen sprayed police station with bullets, setting off a firefight with policemen.
Angry citizens blocked traffic, burned tree trunks, and stormed local government office to protest blackouts and water cuts.
Gunmen attacked a checkpoint in Sinai Peninsula.
Recent attacks have been made upon Muslim Brotherhood offices.
Militants fired at a security checkpoint before escaping.
Security forces killed militants during raids on hideouts in which a house was shelled.
Security forces killed militants during raids on hideouts in which a house was shelled.
Security forces killed militants during raids on hideouts in which a house was shelled.
A patrol consisting of soldiers and police came under fire from militants, groups exchanged gunfire.
Supporters of Morsi rallied in Tahrir Square to support purge of military command and reduction of army powers.
Militants fired upon security forces returning from raid upon suspects, groups then exchanged fire.
Villagers locked the health minister and a provincial governor inside a room after contaminated water caused hundreds to fall ill. The two were only freed with police intervention.
Villagers briefly locked health minister and provincial governor inside hospital room after contamined water caused residents to become ill.
Dozens protested the arrest and trial of a newspaper editor who insulted the president on slander charges.
Citizens demonstrated to demand protection of free speech after court decision ordering  newspaper editor to remain in prison.
Thousands protested President Morsi's consolidation of powers, and briefly clashed with his supporters.
Thousands protested President Morsi's consolidation of powers, and briefly clashed with his supporters.
 with citizens protesting against Brotherhood in front of presidential palace and in other cities, mob attacked anti-Brotherhood protesters in Alexandria.
Khalifa doused himself with gasoline and set himself onfire outside of presidential palace to protest his years of unemployment.
A man set himself on fire outside the presidential palace to protest years of unemployment.
Citizens demonstrated against Brotherhood, for release of those arrested during Mubarak ouster and wage hikes.
Demonstrators in Cairo called for the release of those still imprisoned for participating in the revolution, and for a higher minimum wage.
Demonstrators chanted against Assad regime, threw stones, attempted to break through security cordon to hang rebel flag. Clashes then spread to US Embassy.
Protesters tried to storm the Syrian embassy, angry with the Assad regime. They were rebuffed by security forces, and several were arrested in following clashes. Related skirmishes broke out near the US embassy as well.
Citizens stormed football association headquarters to protest decision to resume league before riot suspects brought to justice and that Al-Masry team will be allowed to play.
Football fans stormed the headquarters of Egypt's Football Association in protest of the league resuming play despite the fact that trials concerning the Port Said massacre were still in court. They attacked the building with flares and other projectiles.
Flight attendants brifly staged strike to demand improved working conditions.
Hostesses and stewards went on strike to protest poor salaries and working conditions.
Gunmen fired at police station, led to exchange of gunfire until attackers fled.
Baggage handlers of EgyptAir staged a strike
Gunmen drove up to a police station in northern Sinai and fired on it for several minutes before driving off.
A tour guides' union marched outside the Egyptian Museum in Cairo to protest the way unliscensed competitors have been allowed to steal their business.
Fans of Al-Ahly protested match played by team due to demand justice for victims of stadium riot, many of which were Al-Ahly supporters.
Fans of Al-Ahly protested match played by team due to demand justice for victims of stadium riot, many of which were Al-Ahly supporters.
Tour guides demonstrated to protest lack of security that exposes them to attacks from vendors and competitors.
Al-Ahly fans protested outside a stadium and in the capital to denounce a lack of justice following the Port Said violence.
Al-Ahly fans protested outside a stadium and in the capital to denounce a lack of justice following the Port Said violence.
Militants attacked and wounded police when they opened fire on patrol pursuing other militants.
Demonstrators climbed walls and breached embassy, replacing US flag with Islamist flag to protest film attacking Prophet Muhammad.
 Protests continued for several days, occasionally breaking into skrimishes between police (who dispersed crowds with tear gas)  and rock-throwing Protesters.
Islamists demonstrated in follow up to prior day's protests regarding anti-Islam film produced in US, threw bottles and stones in clashes with police. Man died from wounds from rubber bullet.
Police incited prisoners to attack Saber, resulting in detainees beating him and cutting him with razor.
Militants stormed base in wave of anger over anti-Muslim film, setting fire to vehicles and battling with peacekeepers.
Christians demonstrated in front of cathedral denouncing film that mocks Prophet Muhammad.
Citizens demonstrated in Tahrir Square against anti-Muslim film and tore up American flag.
Kamel and her family were attacked over film mocking Prophet Muhammad at bus terminals.
Bedouins rioted against the Multinational Force and Observers
Kamel and her family were attacked over film mocking Prophet Muhammad at bus terminals.
 albeit through sit-ins and peaceful marches.
Military conducted raid on village pursuing suspected militants, raiding houses and firing indiscriminately.
Militants opened fire on security headquarters, 2 police stations, and a checkpoint in the area.
Militants fired upon soldiers after the arrest of some of their members, one soldier died in clashes.
Muslims protested the punishment sentenced on a Coptic Christian for insulting the prophet Muhammad online, calling for harsher sentencing.
Activists turned out to protest the whitewashing of  a street mural near Tahrir Square that had become a symbol of the revolution.
Militants left notes threatening Coptic Christians and telling them to leave the city within two days. After 48 hours had passed, two gunmen opened fire on a Coptic-owned store.
Doctors went on partial strike (leaving emergency services unaffected) to protest for better pay and working conditions.
Doctors went on strike to protest poor facilities and low wages, abstained from offering non-emergency services.
Citizens gathered outside Parliament to demand that women's rights be protected in new constitution.
Hundreds gathered outside parliament, calling for womens' rights to be added to the new constitution.
Crowd of angry residents gathered outside of police station after police arrested 2 Coptic Christian boys for urinating on Quran.
Gunmen fired upon a Coptic Chrisitan home, possibly in response to children urinating on a Quran.
Gunmen opened fire on home of Copts hours after President visited area to reassure Christians they wouldn't be targeted.
Citizens marched to mark anniversary of military crackdown on Christian protesters that killed 26 and to demand retribution against army leaders.
Coptic Christians retraced the path of a march that had been attacked by security forces, killing 26, in 2011. The marchers protested the lack of justice for involved military and policemen.
Supporters and opponents of Morsi clashed in Cairo after competing rallies in Tahrir, opponents protested failure to achieve promises by Morsi, supporters denounced acquittals of Mubarak regime officials.
Separate rallies against and in support of President Morsi turned into a violent clash between the two groups, who threw rocks and petrol bombs at each other.
Demonstrators torched Brotherhood headquarters and burned Morsi posters.
After Abdel-Rahim was replaced by Shura Council for report critical of government, colleagues gathered outside newspaper to protest and declared a strike.
Crowd in Tahrir Square committed an act of extra government violence against France 24 TV reporter Sonia Dridi
Citizens protested the new consititution, which they saw as being unfairly influenced by Muslims, and called for apologies for last week's violence.
Citizens demonstrated against Islamist influence and to demand President and Brotherhood ensure new constitution represents all segments of society.
A militant detonated a bomb as police investigated his apartment, killing himself and setting neighboring apartments on fire. Four men supposedly connected to him were also arrested.
Clashes between Copts and Muslims broke out after Muslims tried to block access to Coptic church before mass.
Clashes broke out between Muslims and Coptic Christians after Muslim villagers tried to block off the local church.
Bedouins attacked a police station to free an imprisoned comrade.\
Salafists demonstrated to demand stronger reference to Islamic law in new constitution.
Salafistst Muslims gathered in Tahrir Square to protest the proposed constitution's lack of reference to Sharia law.
Militants pulled in front of police vehicle and opened fire, killing 3 police in revenge for alleged police shooting that left innocent victims dead.
Gunmen fired on a police transport, killing three and injuring another before driving away. A similar attack took place three days later.
Police went on strike to demand stronger military campaign against militants in Sinai, blocked city's main roads as defense/interior ministers arrived.
In response to the recent violence against police by militants, police forces in El-Arish went on strike, calling for a stronger military presence in Sinai.
Salafist Muslims occupied the future site of a Coptic church, threatening to set fire to Coptic houses if they were not allowed to pray there.
Salafist Muslims demonstrated at a Coptic Christian church
Tribesman held an angry protest after 2 ministers failed to show up for meeting with them.
Gunmen opened fire on police riding in car, one wounded.
Gunmen ambushed army truck, stealing vehicle used to transport fuel to bases and checkpoints.
Muslims demonstrated to demand that new constitution be based upon Shariah law.
Islamists demonstrated in Cairo to call for the implementation of Sharia law in the new constitution. A small scuffle later broke out between the Protesters and those who supported a secular constitution. No injuries were reported.
Train workers held strike for five hours to demand firing of chairman of subway system, poor working conditions, equipment, and management.
Citizens demonstrated to demand that President Morsi take a stand against Israeli attacks in Gaza Strip.
Hundreds in Cairo protested Israel's recent strikes on Gaza, demanding President Morsi also speak out against Israel.
Subway employees in Cairo went on strike for several hours to demand their manager be replaced, better pay, and a share of the company's profits.
Brotherhood led protests across Egypt to protest Israeli offensive on Gaza Strip.
Brotherhood led protests across Egypt to protest Israeli offensive on Gaza Strip.
Following train collision with bus that killed children, families set up road blocks and fired guns in air in denunciation of Morsi, angry families gathered near tracks and shouted at officials in al-Mandara.
Following train collision with bus that killed children, families set up road blocks and fired guns in air in denunciation of Morsi, angry families gathered near tracks and shouted at officials in al-Mandara.
Thousands protested Israels' attacks on the Gaza strip.
Angry parents blocked a rail line and demanded the death penalty for sleeping signal operators who allowed a train to crash into a bus full of children, killing over 50.
Hundreds protested Egypt's involvement with the Palestine-Israel conflict outside the Arab League headquarters in Cairo.
Protesters attempting to destroy a concrete barrier put in place during the revolution (to keep Protesters back) were set upon by police. Around 70 were wounded in total.
Citizens clashed with police during demonstrations on 1st anniversary of street battles that left 45 demonstrators dead, also protests took place against Morsi policies and Brotherhood.
After Egyptian television networks incited viewers against Al-Jazeera, calling the nework a pawn of Muslim Brotherhood leaders, assailants firebombed the network's offices in Cairo.
Protesters gathered outside the multinational peacekeeping force's headquarters to call for action against Israel. Shots were fired by the Egyptian troops and one protestor was killed.
Demonstrators firebombed Al Jazeera, accusing it of being biased and attacked police chief who tried to broker an end to 3 days of violent protests.
Protesters marched, then rioted in several cities after President Morsi  claimed emergency powers until a new constitution was finished, and declared his decisions exempt from judicial review. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were stormed and set aflame, and Protesters clashed with Islamists and security forces alike. Protests continued after it became apparent that the proposed new constitution was largely a product of Islamists, and could infringe basic freedoms.
Protesters marched, then rioted in several cities after President Morsi  claimed emergency powers until a new constitution was finished, and declared his decisions exempt from judicial review. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were stormed and set aflame, and Protesters clashed with Islamists and security forces alike. Protests continued after it became apparent that the proposed new constitution was largely a product of Islamists, and could infringe basic freedoms.
Protesters marched, then rioted in several cities after President Morsi  claimed emergency powers until a new constitution was finished, and declared his decisions exempt from judicial review. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were stormed and set aflame, and Protesters clashed with Islamists and security forces alike. Protests continued after it became apparent that the proposed new constitution was largely a product of Islamists, and could infringe basic freedoms.
Protesters marched, then rioted in several cities after President Morsi  claimed emergency powers until a new constitution was finished, and declared his decisions exempt from judicial review. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were stormed and set aflame, and Protesters clashed with Islamists and security forces alike. Protests continued after it became apparent that the proposed new constitution was largely a product of Islamists, and could infringe basic freedoms.
Protesters marched, then rioted in several cities after President Morsi  claimed emergency powers until a new constitution was finished, and declared his decisions exempt from judicial review. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were stormed and set aflame, and Protesters clashed with Islamists and security forces alike. Protests continued after it became apparent that the proposed new constitution was largely a product of Islamists, and could infringe basic freedoms.
Protesters marched, then rioted in several cities after President Morsi  claimed emergency powers until a new constitution was finished, and declared his decisions exempt from judicial review. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were stormed and set aflame, and Protesters clashed with Islamists and security forces alike. Protests continued after it became apparent that the proposed new constitution was largely a product of Islamists, and could infringe basic freedoms.
Protesters marched, then rioted in several cities after President Morsi  claimed emergency powers until a new constitution was finished, and declared his decisions exempt from judicial review. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were stormed and set aflame, and Protesters clashed with Islamists and security forces alike. Protests continued after it became apparent that the proposed new constitution was largely a product of Islamists, and could infringe basic freedoms.
Protesters marched, then rioted in several cities after President Morsi  claimed emergency powers until a new constitution was finished, and declared his decisions exempt from judicial review. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were stormed and set aflame, and Protesters clashed with Islamists and security forces alike. Protests continued after it became apparent that the proposed new constitution was largely a product of Islamists, and could infringe basic freedoms.
Supporters and opponents (who fear a new dictatorship) of Morsi clashed after holding individual protests in several cities, Brotherhood offices torched in 3 cities.
Suspected militants blew up a military structure under construction, injuring three workers.
Judges went on strike in response to President Morsi's seizure of power away from the judiciary. The highest courts in the land joined in protest of the new constitution, refusing to participate in its referendum.
Judges went on strike in response to President Morsi's seizure of power away from the judiciary. The highest courts in the land joined in protest of the new constitution, refusing to participate in its referendum.
Judges and prosecutors have called partial strike to protest Morsi's decree granting himself near-absolute power.
Judges and prosecutors have called partial strike to protest Morsi's decree granting himself near-absolute power.
Judges and prosecutors have called partial strike to protest Morsi's decree granting himself near-absolute power.
Another military building was attacked in the middle of its construction. No injuries were reported.
Journalists at an emergency union meeting broke into scuffles over Morsi's decree giving him broad powers.
Citizens marched at funeral processions for activists killed in demonstrations, some chanting for justice during procession.
Citizens marched at funeral processions for activists killed in demonstrations, some chanting for justice during procession.
Citizens demonstrated in several cities to protest Morsi's decree of near-absolute power, clashes broke out in several cities as Brotherhood offices were attacked.
Appeals court and Court of Cassation judges went on strike to protest Morsi decree assuming broad powers.
Citizens demonstrated in Tahrir Square to rally against draft constitution put forth by Islamist-dominated panel, which was claimed to be hijacked by Islamist interests. Supporters and opponents clashed in Alexandria.
Citizens demonstrated in Tahrir Square to rally against draft constitution put forth by Islamist-dominated panel, which was claimed to be hijacked by Islamist interests. Supporters and opponents clashed in Alexandria.
Supporters of Morsi demonstrated to support new constitution and to counteract mass opposition protests.
President Morsi's supporters turned out in several cities to protest the chaos and strikes following the President's decision to claim further power. They also blocked members of the Supreme Constitutional Court from a hearing on the new constitution.
President Morsi's supporters turned out in several cities to protest the chaos and strikes following the President's decision to claim further power. They also blocked members of the Supreme Constitutional Court from a hearing on the new constitution.
President Morsi's supporters turned out in several cities to protest the chaos and strikes following the President's decision to claim further power. They also blocked members of the Supreme Constitutional Court from a hearing on the new constitution.
Islamists held sit-in to prevent members of court from convening, accused court of conspiring against constitutional referendum.
Supporters of Morsi protested in front of court ahead of ruling on legitimacy of constitutional panel.
Egypt's highest court joined lower courts in strike against Morsi's decree granting himself near-absolute power.
A demonstration was held against the government
al-Ahram staff marched to journalists' union to protest absence of guarantees against jailing reporters in constitution.
Citizens demonstrated outside of presidential palace and other cities to protest referendum on new constitution and Morsi's decrees granting him increased power. Protest turned violent at palace, supporters/opponents clashed. Brotherhood offices torched. Army deployed tanks outside of palace.
Independent and opposition newspapers went on strike to protest the lack of press freedom seen in the draft constitution.
Protesters surrounded the Presidential palace, calling for Morsi's removal. In other parts of Cairo and several other cities, clashes broke out between anti-Morsi Protesters and security forces or Islamists. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were firebombed.
Protesters surrounded the Presidential palace, calling for Morsi's removal. In other parts of Cairo and several other cities, clashes broke out between anti-Morsi Protesters and security forces or Islamists. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were firebombed.
Protesters surrounded the Presidential palace, calling for Morsi's removal. In other parts of Cairo and several other cities, clashes broke out between anti-Morsi Protesters and security forces or Islamists. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were firebombed.
Protesters surrounded the Presidential palace, calling for Morsi's removal. In other parts of Cairo and several other cities, clashes broke out between anti-Morsi Protesters and security forces or Islamists. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were firebombed.
Protesters surrounded the Presidential palace, calling for Morsi's removal. In other parts of Cairo and several other cities, clashes broke out between anti-Morsi Protesters and security forces or Islamists. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were firebombed.
Protesters surrounded the Presidential palace, calling for Morsi's removal. In other parts of Cairo and several other cities, clashes broke out between anti-Morsi Protesters and security forces or Islamists. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were firebombed.
Protesters surrounded the Presidential palace, calling for Morsi's removal. In other parts of Cairo and several other cities, clashes broke out between anti-Morsi Protesters and security forces or Islamists. Several Muslim Brotherhood offices were firebombed.
At least 8 influential dailies suspended publication to protest restrictions on freedom of expression in constitution.
Urged on by Muslim Brotherhood leadership, pro-Morsi citizens surrounded and attacked the Protesters at the presidential palace, forcing them to flee. Anti-Morsi activists later returned with a counter-attack, hurling rocks and firebombs at the president's supporters.
A peaceful protest took place outside the presidential palace, with demonstrators demanding Morsi renounce his expanded powers and change the draft constitution. This eventually became a smaller sit-in protest.
Hardline Salafists attempted to storm the headquarters of television channels hostile to President Morsi. They were rebuffed by police, who used tear gas on them. Following protests were more restrained.\
Salafists demonstrated to protest coverage of privately owned networks, movie director was attacked.
More Protesters gathered outside the presidential palace and around Cairo, calling for an end to the Muslim Brotherhood's rule and the constitutional draft. They later called for a 'no' vote on the constitution.
Masked gunmen fired on Protesters in Tahrir Square, wounding nine.
Rivals staged mass rallies in support/against Morsi and impending constitution referendum, gunmen fired birdshot at opposition protesters.
Morsi supporters gathered to decry the actions of those who would stop the new constitution, urging a 'yes' vote.
Islamists filled square raising pictures of Morsi on eve of constitution referendum during dueling protests between supporters and opponents of constitution.
Supporters and opponents of new constitution clashed on eve of referendum.
Supporters and opponents of new constitution clashed on eve of referendum.
Protesters laid siege to a mosque after a preacher labelled those who did not support the new constitution 'heretics'. Islamists and Protesters clashed violently and the police had to use tear gas to stop the fighting.
Protesters laid siege to a mosque after a preacher labelled those who did not support the new constitution 'heretics'. Islamists and Protesters clashed violently and the police had to use tear gas to stop the fighting.
Women staged a street-blocking protest in opposition to a judge they believed was purposefully stalling so they would not be able to vote.
Salafists attacked the liberal Wafd Party headquarters on the night of the referendum, angry over widespread opposition.
Violence flared between opponents and supporters of constitution, Islamists attacked headquarters of Wafd Party with fireworks and stones.
Violence flared between opponents and supporters of constitution, Islamists attacked headquarters of Wafd Party with fireworks and stones.
Women demonstrated  by blocking street and chanting against judge after waiting 10 hours to vote in constitutional referendum.
A group of high-ranking judges joined many other members of the judiciary, announcing they would boycott the second round of the constitutional referendum.
Magistrates staged sit-in outside of Abdallah's office to demand his resignation, appointed less than a month ago by President Morsi.
Members of the judiciary organized a sit-in outside the offices of the prosecutor general, leading him to resign.
Citizens demonstrated to protest against Islamist-backed constitution and alleged voting irregularities during referendum.
Thousands protested outside the presidential palace and in Tahrir Square, arguing there was still time to drop the drafted constitution.
Rivals clashed over constitution referendum, groups set fire to vehicles and pelted each other with rocks.
Clashes erupted between two protest groups -those in favor of and opposed to the new constitution draft. Riot police quelled the violence, arresting several.
State Council and other referendum judges boycotted 2nd round of referendum due to alleged irregularities in 1st round.
Lawyers protested against the government
Prosecutors held rally then declared strike to demand the resignation of Morsi-appointed prosecutor general.
Gunmen shot and seriously wounded a protester, and police arrested a cafe owner who told police that he fired on the protesters after people manning makeshift checkpoints searched his car and shot at him
Two knife-wielding men killed a technician and a principal at a school
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman
A police officer and six recruits were wounded when gunmen attacked their patrol
Masked attackers fired birdshot and threw Molotov cocktails at protesters outside the presidential palace, wounding 7 police officers and 16 civilians and two suspects were later arrested
Hundreds of protesters demanding rail safety and calling for the toppling of the Morsi government tried to block trains from leaving several stations and threw stones at a train and clashed with security forces who fired tear gas
Hundreds of protesters demanding rail safety and calling for the toppling of the Morsi government tried to block trains from leaving several stations and threw stones at a train and clashed with security forces who fired tear gas
Hundreds of protesters demanding rail safety and calling for the toppling of the Morsi government tried to block trains from leaving several stations and threw stones at a train and clashed with security forces who fired tear gas
Thousands of Ultras protested to demand severe punishments for 75 people on trial for dozens of deaths from soccer riots in 2013 and also chanted slogans against President Morsi, demanding a timetable for military officers to hand over power and elections
Hundreds of Muslims went on a rampage to demand an investigation into allegations that a Coptic man had tried to sexually abuse a Muslim girl, and the police fired tear gas to disperse the Muslims and arrested more than 10
Dozens of people staged a demonstration outside a courthouse where Alexandria's ex-security director and others were on trial for the killing of protesters and prtetsers clashed with police and on 1/20  2 riot police trucks were set on fire by the protesters
Clashes erupted between residents and police after a resident was wounded by a bullet shot by police who were chasing a drug dealer and four people were killed
Families of men sentenced by a military tribunal for drug dealing tried to storm a police station, and police fired tear gas and attacked the crowd
Three policemen were kidnapped by drug dealers during a police ambush and released shortly after
Ultras demonstrated to protest the deaths of 74 soccer fans last year in a violent rampage at a soccer game
Protesters tried to dismantle a security barrier and called for the fall of President Morsi, and some protesters threw rocks and Molotov cocktails at police, who fired tear gas
Activists blocked a railway station and tore down welcoming banners to protest inaugurating new projects while there is corruption in the railway system
An estimated 500,000 people marched across Egypt against the Morsi government and against the Muslim Brotherhood and the protests turned violent, with 11 people killed and several hundred wounded
An estimated 500,000 people marched across Egypt against the Morsi government and against the Muslim Brotherhood and the protests turned violent, with 11 people killed and several hundred wounded
An estimated 500,000 people marched across Egypt against the Morsi government and against the Muslim Brotherhood and the protests turned violent, with 11 people killed and several hundred wounded
An estimated 500,000 people marched across Egypt against the Morsi government and against the Muslim Brotherhood and the protests turned violent, with 11 people killed and several hundred wounded
An estimated 500,000 people marched across Egypt against the Morsi government and against the Muslim Brotherhood and the protests turned violent, with 11 people killed and several hundred wounded
An estimated 500,000 people marched across Egypt against the Morsi government and against the Muslim Brotherhood and the protests turned violent, with 11 people killed and several hundred wounded
An estimated 500,000 people marched across Egypt against the Morsi government and against the Muslim Brotherhood and the protests turned violent, with 11 people killed and several hundred wounded
An estimated 500,000 people marched across Egypt against the Morsi government and against the Muslim Brotherhood and the protests turned violent, with 11 people killed and several hundred wounded
Thousands of Ultras gathered outside football club headquarters and outside Cabinet and Parliament headquarters, chanting slogans against the police and government and police fired tear gas to disperse them
Relatives of those who were sentenced to death over a stadium riot tried to storm the prison where the convicts were being held and rampaged through the city, attacking several government buildings
Protesters attacked police stations, freeing 25 detainees and looting weapons while others looted and torched an army social club
Dozens of policemen prevented the Interior Minister from attending the funeral of policemen in protest of police not having been armed with live rounds to protect themselves during rioting
Anti-government protesters threw rocks at police and police fired tear gas and over several days of clashes 3 people were killed
Mourners marched in the street for a public funeral and chanted slogans against the government and several mourners opened fire at a police club next to the cemetery, and police fired tear gas in response
Thousands of people demonstrated after a government-issued 9:00 pm curfew went into effect in defiance of the measure and chanted slogans against Islamist rule in and two people were killed when clashes erupted between protesters and security forces in Port Said
Thousands of people demonstrated after a government-issued 9:00 pm curfew went into effect in defiance of the measure and chanted slogans against Islamist rule in and two people were killed when clashes erupted between protesters and security forces in Port Said
Thousands of people demonstrated after a government-issued 9:00 pm curfew went into effect in defiance of the measure and chanted slogans against Islamist rule in and two people were killed when clashes erupted between protesters and security forces in Port Said
Hundreds of protesters carrying Egyptian flags chanted slogans against the Muslim Brotherhood
Six gunmen on motorbikes attacked the city's main prison, and were repulsed by members of the armed forces
Dozens of people forced their way into a luxury hotel, sacking stores inside and smashing glass and furniture in the lobby, and police fired tear gas
Dozens of members of the Black Bloc anarchist group gathered outside the prosecutor's office to protest against an order by the prosecutor to arrest anyone from the group and riot police arrested at least four protesters
Workers striking over a contract dispute shut down Egypt's port of Ain Sukhna for 7 days
Thousands of protesters called for Morsi's removal and protesters threw bombs and rocks into the grounds of the presidential palace and police shot and killed two protesters, arrested more than 20 and set fire to protester tents, with more than 50 people were injured
Thousands of protesters called for Morsi's removal and protesters threw bombs and rocks into the grounds of the presidential palace and police shot and killed two protesters, arrested more than 20 and set fire to protester tents, with more than 50 people were injured
Thousands of protesters called for Morsi's removal and protesters threw bombs and rocks into the grounds of the presidential palace and police shot and killed two protesters, arrested more than 20 and set fire to protester tents, with more than 50 people were injured
Dozens of protesters threw stones and bottles at Prime Minister Qandil's motorcade
Several hundred protesters gathered outside the presidential palace and threw rocks and Molotov cocktails at the compound's walls and police fired tear gas when protesters tried to storm the palace gates
Protesters marched to provincial government headquarters to protest the death of a protester in police custody and police fired tear gas, and protesters then threw rocks at police and rioted, with 9 people arrested
Youths waved placards with slogans against Iran over its support for Syria's al-Assad regime as he left a mosque and said they would take revenge against Shiites, and one of the protesters tried to throw a shoe at Ahmadinejad and pushed a bodyguard and was arrested
2,000 people staged a demonstration, chanting against the government for not doing anything to protect women demonstrators from being raped
Thousands protested in several places around Egypt against the Morsi government and Muslim Brotherhood politicians and clashes broke out between police and protesters in many spots, protesters threw rocks at police, who fired tear gas
Thousands protested in several places around Egypt against the Morsi government and Muslim Brotherhood politicians and clashes broke out between police and protesters in many spots, protesters threw rocks at police, who fired tear gas
Thousands protested in several places around Egypt against the Morsi government and Muslim Brotherhood politicians and clashes broke out between police and protesters in many spots, protesters threw rocks at police, who fired tear gas
Thousands protested in several places around Egypt against the Morsi government and Muslim Brotherhood politicians and clashes broke out between police and protesters in many spots, protesters threw rocks at police, who fired tear gas
Hundreds of protesters blocked metro stations and got into fistfights with passengers who tried to stop them and also blocked other areas to demand a new unity government and many of them marched to the presidential palace and threw stones at police, who fired tear gas and water cannon
About 1,000 protesters demonstrated to demand an end to sexual violence and an end to impunity
Hundreds of low-ranking policemen staged a strike in at least 10 provinces, demanding they not be used as a tool for political oppression and demanding greater firepower to defend themselves
Hundreds of low-ranking policemen staged a strike in at least 10 provinces, demanding they not be used as a tool for political oppression and demanding greater firepower to defend themselves
5,000 Morsi supporters demonstrated to denounce violence between police and anti-Morsi protesters and called for the release of the blind Sheikh Omar Abdel Rahman
1,000 liberal activists rallied outside the Qasr al-Kobba palace, and police fired tear gas to disperse the crowd when they tried to scale its walls and arrested more than 30
Several thousand people marched on the Defense Ministry to call for retribution for the deaths of protesters during military rule
Protesters marched on a courthouse to demand justice for a 12 year-old vendor killed by the military
 by the government
Around 50 policemen protested to demand more weapons to fight a surge of crime
Police and civilian mourners at a funeral for a police captain killed in a gunfight badly beat a man they believed to be involved in the shooting
Thousands of football fans, staged a march against the government and raised pictures of those killed in protest violence; the protesters then enforced a work stoppage and over several days of rioting seven were killed
Private minibus drivers protested a lack of diesel fuel, waiting in a parking lot and threatening to block railroads if diesel is not made available
Protesters marched in support of a general strike and held pictures of those killed in protest violence and chanted against Morsi
The offices of an opposition party were torched and stormed by masked gunmen, who looted documents and videos before setting the building on fire
Thousands of brick workers blocked railroad tracks to protest rising industrial oil prices
Thousands of brick workers blocked railroad tracks to protest rising industrial oil prices
A group of protesters closed the doors of Cairo's main administrative building, demanding the implementation of the goals of the revolution and a delay of parliamentary elections
Hundreds of quarry workers stormed governorate headquarters to protest against working conditions
Hundreds of protesters taking part in a sit-in outside the provincial government offices organized a general strike, and the strike led to clashes with police and Morsi supporters
Protesters threw firebombs and rocks at police who tried to re-open Cairo's central Tahrir Square
 dance outside Brotherhood headquarters and chanted slogans against the Islamists
Hundreds of Muslims tried to storm a church after a rumor that a women who converted to Christianity was hiding in the church and police fired tear gas and dozens of protesters threw stones and firebombs and police fired tear gas
 and slapped
Several hundred protesters burned pictures of Sec. of State John Kerry and chanted against US support for Morsi
Muslims ransacked and set fire to a Coptic Christian's house after he was accused of molesting a Muslim child
Dozens of youths threw rocks at public buses
Protesters marched all over Cairo and police fired tear gas, after which protesters set police cars on fire
Thousands of residents protested against the government during a funeral procession for civilians killed during street battles with security forces
Thousands of policemen across Egypt staged a strike to demand the resignation of the interior minister, saying they no longer wanted to be used as a political tool
Thousands of policemen across Egypt staged a strike to demand the resignation of the interior minister, saying they no longer wanted to be used as a political tool
Thousands of policemen across Egypt staged a strike to demand the resignation of the interior minister, saying they no longer wanted to be used as a political tool
Thousands of policemen across Egypt staged a strike to demand the resignation of the interior minister, saying they no longer wanted to be used as a political tool
Thousands of policemen across Egypt staged a strike to demand the resignation of the interior minister, saying they no longer wanted to be used as a political tool
Thousands of policemen across Egypt staged a strike to demand the resignation of the interior minister, saying they no longer wanted to be used as a political tool
Thousands of policemen across Egypt staged a strike to demand the resignation of the interior minister, saying they no longer wanted to be used as a political tool
Thousands of policemen across Egypt staged a strike to demand the resignation of the interior minister, saying they no longer wanted to be used as a political tool
Thousands of policemen across Egypt staged a strike to demand the resignation of the interior minister, saying they no longer wanted to be used as a political tool
Protesters blocked traffic along the walls of the U.S. Embassy and other diplomatic missions and clashed with police, and briefly seized a security van carrying detainees, pelting it with stones
Football fans smashed the windows of a building housing former interior minister Mohammed Ibrahim, who was the head of police when a deadly football riot in Port Said killed 74 people in 2012
Protesters clashed with riot police
Protesters clashed with riot police
Protesters clashed with riot police
Football fans angry about a court verdict regarding football violence blocked railway tracks between Cairo and Alexandria, threw rocks and bombs at police and set two restaurants on fire; police fired tear gas and gunshots and two protesters were killed, and widespread other rioting occured
Football fans angry about a court verdict regarding football violence blocked railway tracks between Cairo and Alexandria, threw rocks and bombs at police and set two restaurants on fire; police fired tear gas and gunshots and two protesters were killed, and widespread other rioting occured
Football fans angry about a court verdict regarding football violence blocked railway tracks between Cairo and Alexandria, threw rocks and bombs at police and set two restaurants on fire; police fired tear gas and gunshots and two protesters were killed, and widespread other rioting occured
Hundreds of drivers of trucks and minibuses blocked Cairo's vital roads and bridges, and highways across the country in an angry protest strike over fuel shortages and violent clashes broke out in several places
Hundreds of drivers of trucks and minibuses blocked Cairo's vital roads and bridges, and highways across the country in an angry protest strike over fuel shortages and violent clashes broke out in several places
Hundreds of drivers of trucks and minibuses blocked Cairo's vital roads and bridges, and highways across the country in an angry protest strike over fuel shortages and violent clashes broke out in several places
Protesters demonstrated after an Egyptian Coptic Christian was tortured to death by Libyan police, vandalized the Libyan embassy and chanted slogans against the Egyptian government, which the protesters said have done nothing to assist the Copts jailed in Libya
Members of the Ultras Devils club staged a protest and were arrested
Several hundred people demonstrated in support of bringing back military rule and ousting President Morsi
Thousands of protesters demanded retribution for the killing of around 45 people in clashes with police
2013 Egypt Government
Dozens of bakery owners protested against economic austerity measures and shortages of diesel fuel
Members of the Muslim Brotherhood attacked and beat with sticks and chains a group of activists after they sprayed anti-brotherhood graffiti on the ground outside the group's headquarters
Thousands of anti-government protesters tried to storm the hall where President Morsi was meeting with local officials and the protesters clashed with Morsi supporters, and police fired tear gas to disperse them
Hundreds of people protested against the Muslim Brotherhood and police fired tear gas to disperse the protesters
Dozens of journalists protested outside their syndicate against an incident in which members of the Muslim Brotherhood attacked journalists
Angry microbus drivers and residents cut off all the major roads of Mahalla to protest a shortage of diesel fuel
Two men accused of stealing a motorized rickshaw and kidnapping children were beaten and then hung by their feet, dying in the process
Protesters set fire to a police vehicle after they attempted to clear a sit-in
Hundreds of Muslim villagers attacked Christian-owned stores in search of a girl suspected of being kidnapped by a Christian
Three people were killed when a soccer game between teenagers turned into a brawl involving knives
Egyptian villagers beat and lynched a suspected car thief, hanging him from a tree
6 Armed Bedouin tribesmen kidnapped two tourists as part of a plan to help free relatives imprisoned in Egypt
A pro-Muslim Brotherhood demonstration was held, and the protesters were hit with rocks thrown by nearby buildings and people in the crowd were beaten by anti-Brotherhood citizens
Muslim Brotherhood offices were ransacked  by thousands of protesters, who were marching to demanding the resignation of the attorney general and the interior minister and President Morsi, and police fired tear gas to disperse them and several offices were looted
Muslim Brotherhood offices were ransacked  by thousands of protesters, who were marching to demanding the resignation of the attorney general and the interior minister and President Morsi, and police fired tear gas to disperse them and several offices were looted
Muslim Brotherhood offices were ransacked  by thousands of protesters, who were marching to demanding the resignation of the attorney general and the interior minister and President Morsi, and police fired tear gas to disperse them and several offices were looted
Hundreds of Islamists held a protest outside studios belonging to independent TV networks that are critical of President Morsi in protest of perceived bias in the coverage of clashes and the protesters threw rocks at police who fired tear gas
 the leader of the Muslim Brotherhood movement, as a pro-democracy activist arrived at a prosecutor's office
Morsi supporters and opponents clashed during an anti-government protest, with Morsi supporters throwing bombs and rocks at the protesters who threw rocks back at them and 9 people were injured and police fired tear gas to disperse them
Hundreds of people protested outside the High Court to demand the resignation of prosecutor general Talaat Abdallah after a court ruled that his appointment by Morsi was illegal and the protesters also denounced arrest warrants issued for Egyptian activists
Protesters set a car on fire near the offices of the Justice and Freedom party, the political arm of the Muslim Brotherhood, after failing to storm the building
Protesters tried to torch a Brotherhood office, and police fired tear gas and exchanged in rock throwing with protesters
Border guards at Borg El-Arab airport staged a strike over low salaries and to demand better working conditions
Work stoppages in warehouses where gas cylinders are kept occurred across Egypt after a gas price hike
Hundreds of students demonstrated at Al-Azhar University, blocking roads and chanting slogans against the university's management after hundreds suffered food poisoning at a dormitory
Taxi drivers stormed the gates of the finance ministry during a protest against the terms of loan payments on their cars, with other drivers were protesting that the government had not yet replaced their old taxis with more recent cars equipped with meters
2013 Egypt Iranian convoy
A Muslim man objected to children drawing a swastika on a religious institute and an argument broke out with a young Christian man who was passing by, which escalated into a gun battle between the Muslims and the Christians and six people were killed in two days of clashes and police fired tear gas
Protesters marking the April 6 protest movement set up tire barricades outside the Superior Court and threw rocks at police and police fired tear gas and several other places also experienced clashes
Protesters marking the April 6 protest movement set up tire barricades outside the Superior Court and threw rocks at police and police fired tear gas and several other places also experienced clashes
Protesters marking the April 6 protest movement set up tire barricades outside the Superior Court and threw rocks at police and police fired tear gas and several other places also experienced clashes
Protesters marking the April 6 protest movement set up tire barricades outside the Superior Court and threw rocks at police and police fired tear gas and several other places also experienced clashes
Train drivers demanding salary raises and pay for holidays worked called a nationwide strike in response to a government proposal to raise benefit payments by 10 percent, which they rejected as too little
Hundreds of funeral mourners for Christians killed the day before were pelted with stones and hit by firebombs and shot at by residents as they left a cathedral to begin an anti-government protest and two people were killed, and riot police fired tear gas
Armed Bedouin tribesmen abducted a Hungarian member of the multinational observer force to demand the release of a member of their tribe arrested earlier on drug charges and they released their captive after tribal elders intervened
Gunmen opened fire on a security convoy, killing a police lieutenant and injuring another policeman
Zamalek football fans protested outside the sports ministry offices and blocked access to the building in protest of the decision to bring back closed-door fixtures at Arab-African football matches
Thousands of Islamists demonstrated against the High Court, which they believe is hostile to Morsi, and threw rocks at and beat up opposition supporters and police arrested 39 and fired tear gas
Thousands of Islamists demonstrated against the High Court, which they believe is hostile to Morsi, and threw rocks at and beat up opposition supporters and police arrested 39 and fired tear gas
Dozens of members of the Black Block militant opposition group hurled stones and firebombs at riot police and at the presidential palace and set fire to a police vehicle and police fired tear gas and arrested 12
Muslims surrounded a church accused of helping a Christian convert flee to Turkey with a Christian man and set fire to a priest's car and threw stones at police, who fired tear gas and arrested 10
Several thousand students marched to call for the dismissal of the Minister of Higher Education, accusing him of allowing violence on campuses against student protests and also calling for improvements in the education system
Police officers demanding higher wages, better benefits as well as the resignation of the Interior Minister staged a strike throughout Egypt
Police officers demanding higher wages, better benefits as well as the resignation of the Interior Minister staged a strike throughout Egypt
Police officers demanding higher wages, better benefits as well as the resignation of the Interior Minister staged a strike throughout Egypt
Police officers demanding higher wages, better benefits as well as the resignation of the Interior Minister staged a strike throughout Egypt
Police officers demanding higher wages, better benefits as well as the resignation of the Interior Minister staged a strike throughout Egypt
Students, angry over the quality of basic services in the university hostel after more than 100 students suffered from food poisoning, blocked the main road leading to the university, and security forces fired tear gas
Hundreds of Salafist Islamists protested outside the Egyptian National Security Agency, accusing the powerful security service of harassing them and some harassed journalists and tried to break an AFP cameraman's equipment
An angry mob lynched the son of a Muslim Brotherhood leader, accusing him of killing a man over Facebook comments critical of the Islamist movement and one mob member was fatally wounded from rocks thrown by the suspected murderer's family
A Muslim Brotherhood leader's son pulled out a gun and opened fire indiscriminately, killing a passerby after an argument with a man who had criticised the Brotherhood on the internet
Protesters, including the Black Bloc opposition group, demonstrated outside the offices of the Prosecutor General and set fire to the entrance of the building and threw rocks and firebombs and police fired tear gas
5 gunmen driving a pick up traded fire with Prime Minister Qandil's bodyguards who were travelling in a convoy with him and a passerby was shot and killed
An American was stabbed by a knife-wielding assailant after the attacker asked him his nationality and learned he was American, and the attacker was arrested
 in protest of Israeli airstrikes in Syria and the detention of a Palestinian Muslim cleric
A Coptic Christian man stabbed his wife after she had converted to Christianity and tried to visit their son at his school and the man was arrested
Gunmen opened fire on a caf_ that sold alcohol, killing a waiter
Policemen and soldiers were kidnapped by gunmen, who held them hostage to demand the release of a group of prisoners held at a police station and they were released on 5/22
Muslims and Christians threw firebombs and shot at each other after a Coptic man allegedly sexually harassed a Muslim woman, and one man died from a heart attack
Hundreds of protesters marched to denounce the rule of Morsi and to demand elections and they later threw firebombs at police, who fired tear gas
Dozens of policemen closed the Rafah border crossing with Gaza in protest of the kidnapping of colleagues in the Sinai peninsula and re-opened the crossing after the captives were released on 5/22
Around 60 airport baggage handlers staged a strike to protest for safer working conditions after a colleague died when a conveyer belt used to unload luggage fell on his head
Police closed a commercial passage with Israel in support of colleagues who shut down a border crossing with Gaza to protest the abduction of policemen
A police camp came under fire with heavy weapons
Gunmen opened fire at the Oja border crossing with Israel
Egyptian troops and police mistakenly fired on a Bedouin funeral, and several armed Bedouin tribesmen fired back at the soldiers and police
Dozens of protesters accused the Shura Council, the upper house of parliament, of being illegitimate
Opera house employees protested, accusing the Culture minister of bending to pressure from Islamists because they fired their boss, and some held a sit in overnight to prevent any replacement from entering
 to protest against Islamist designs on cultural institutions
Dozens of Egyptian artists, movie directors, writers and the staff of the Cairo Opera house held a protest to denounce recent measures of the newly appointed culture minister
Hundreds of Coptic Christians held a protest after coming under attack by unidentified assailants who stole their money and personal belongings and beat them
Workers at the Cairo international airport blocked airplanes on the tarmac and disrupted flights as part of a strike to demand bonuses and the dismissal of corrupt officials
Writers, artists and intellectuals stormed the culture minister's office in a sit-in protest and on 6/11, dozens of Islamists clashed with the protesters, injuring several
Women activists were attacked while attending a conference by assailants, who beat them with sticks and threw rocks
Assailants stormed and petrol-bombed the opposition Tamarrod campaign's offices, causing fire damage to the main entrance
Members of the Black Bloc opposition group hurled stones at the Central Security forces who fired back tear gas
Hundreds of judges staged a strike against a judicial reform bill
2013 Egypt Muslim cleric
Villagers abducted and beat a man to death after they accused him of killing a minibus driver
Militants shot and killed a counterterrorism police officer after they swerved in front of his car while he was driving, and the officer killed one of his two assailants in a gunfight
Villagers beat a man to death and dragged his body through the streets after he suspectedly raped and killed a teenage girl
The funeral of a counterterrorism officer killed by militants turned into an anti-government protest, with policemen calling for the fall of President Morsi
Organizers of the Tamarod opposition movement were attacked by Morsi supporters and up to 16 were injured
Egypt Air pilots staged a sit-in protest that delayed 22 flights to demand changes in the company's top management and the payment of bonuses
Angry tourism workers and activists protested outside an Islamist Governor's office because of his links to a former militant group and other protests against appointments to governor occured throughout the country and turned violent
Angry tourism workers and activists protested outside an Islamist Governor's office because of his links to a former militant group and other protests against appointments to governor occured throughout the country and turned violent
Angry tourism workers and activists protested outside an Islamist Governor's office because of his links to a former militant group and other protests against appointments to governor occured throughout the country and turned violent
Angry tourism workers and activists protested outside an Islamist Governor's office because of his links to a former militant group and other protests against appointments to governor occured throughout the country and turned violent
Angry tourism workers and activists protested outside an Islamist Governor's office because of his links to a former militant group and other protests against appointments to governor occured throughout the country and turned violent
Angry tourism workers and activists protested outside an Islamist Governor's office because of his links to a former militant group and other protests against appointments to governor occured throughout the country and turned violent
Angry tourism workers and activists protested outside an Islamist Governor's office because of his links to a former militant group and other protests against appointments to governor occured throughout the country and turned violent
Muslim Brotherhood supporters formed human chains to enable Brotherhood governor Adel el-Khouli to enter his office
Protesters blocked a mosque where a Muslim Brotherhood cleric was scheduled to visit and clashed with Brotherhood members
At least 20 people were wounded when opponents and supporters of President Morsi pelted each other with rocks
Protesters took part in an anti-Morsi march and clashed with Morsi supporters
100,000 Islamists gathered in a show of strength ahead of planned anti-Morsi protests and threw water bottles at media crews and damaged their equipment
Thousands of anti-Morsi protesters gathered near the defense ministry, calling on the army to take power
A house where Shiites were meeting was surrounded by Sunni Muslims who stormed the building, beating and killing 4 and wounding several and police that tried to intervene were beaten with sticks and knives but on 6/25 eight suspects were arrested
Thousands of protesters gathered in Tahrir square and chanted against President Morsi, calling for the fall of the regime and the protesters staged a sit in for several days
Morsi supporters were getting ready to hold a pro-government protest when opponents began throwing garbage at them and fighting erupted, and three people were killed
Pro-government and anti-government protesters clashed, and two people were killed after both sides threw stones at each other and fired gunshots
The office of the Freedom and Justice Party was torched
Two people were killed when thousands of anti-government and pro-government protesters clashed and police fired tear gas
A crowd stormed the Brotherhood headquarters and destroyed electronic devices
Hundreds of protesters hurled stones at Freedom and Justice Party offices and tore down the party sign
, referring to Morsi's popular mandate
The office of the Freedom and Justice Party was torched
An anti-Morsi protest was held and one person was killed
An anti-Morsi protest was held, and protesters had an explosive thrown at them and a journalist was killed
An anti-Morsi march was held, and the protesters were attacked by Morsi supporters, who fired gunshots and threw acid at the protesters
Protesters stormed a Brotherhood office and attacked members inside, injuring 10, and set fire to the office
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman during an ambush
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters gathered for a pro-Morsi sit-in outside the Rabaah al-Adawiya mosque and in another spot in Cairo that each lasted several months, and clashes erupted between Morsi supporters and opponents, leaving more than 30 injured and on 8/14, the Egyptian military cleared out the pro-Morsi sit ins, and at least 638 were shot and killed, including forty-nine policemen
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Protests were held nationwide calling for the fall of the Morsi regime and in clashes nationwide 16 people were killed
Tens of thousands of protesters poured into the streets, voicing support for army chief and Defence Minister General al-Sisi
Tens of thousands of protesters poured into the streets, voicing support for army chief and Defence Minister General al-Sisi
Tens of thousands of protesters poured into the streets, voicing support for army chief and Defence Minister General al-Sisi
About 3,000 anti-Morsi protesters stormed and torched the Freedom and Justice party villa
Protesters set Brotherhood headquarters on fire before looting it of furniture, files, rugs, blankets, air conditioning units and portraits of Morsi
Hundreds of government supporters staged a demonstration near Cairo University and gunmen shot and killed 16 protesters and injured several hundred
About 1,500 Morsi supporters marched after prayers, chanting for Morsi and damaging cars, and residents confronted them, taking their weapons and firing in the air to disperse them while the army deployed and fired tear gas
The Egyptian military removed President Morsi from power and named Adly Mansour president of Egypt
Islamists destroyed cars and shops and threw stones at a church and police fired tear gas at them
2013 Egypt Government
Six Morsi supporters were killed after opening fire at the city's police headquarters
Morsi supporters tried to storm a police station, but where battled back by police, who killed three
Morsi supporters clashed with Morsi supporters with rocks and guns, and 30 people were wounded
Morsi supporters attacked Morsi opponents who were holding a rally, and at least 12 people were killed
Morsi supporters and opponents clashed, and police fired tear gas to disperse them
A security checkpoint came under fire by gunmen and two soldiers were injured
Clashes between Morsi supporters and opponents led to the death of one person
Pro- and anti-Morsi protesters clashed and six people were injured
Morsi supporters traded gunfire with opponents, and at least 2 people were killed
Thousands of Morsi supporters marched on the Republican Guard headquarters to protest against what they called the return of the regime of autocrat Hosni Mubarak, and security forces exchanged gunfire with some protesters, killing four and protesters threw rocks at police who fired tear gas
Thousands of Morsi opponents staging a protest clashed with Morsi supporters near the state television building, throwing rocks and exchanging gunfire with one another
A mob torched houses of Christians and beat and stabbed 4 to death after the body of a dead Muslim villager was found
2013 Egypt Christian homes
Armed Morsi supporters stormed provincial headquarters after a gunfight and raised the banner of Al-Qaeda-inspired Islamist militants
Gunmen on a motorbike killed four policemen guarding a government building
People holding a pro-Morsi protest tried to storm a government building and police fired shots into the air to disperse them
Islamists attacked the main church in Qena
Islamists threw stones at security forces before being dispersed
Islamists killed a soldier in a coordinated machine gun and rocket attack and also attacked security forces in Rafah
Islamists killed a soldier in a coordinated machine gun and rocket attack and also attacked security forces in Rafah
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters demonstrated in a sit-in outside a mosque that lasted several weeks, chanting slogans against the toppling of Morsi
Gunmen kidnapped and decapitated a Coptic Christian man
Gunmen killed a Coptic Christian priest while he shopped at an outdoor market
Hundreds of thousands of people staged demonstrations to show that his ouster was not a coup but the reflection of the people's will and to denounce the U.S. for their perceived support for Morsi
Hundreds of thousands of people staged demonstrations to show that his ouster was not a coup but the reflection of the people's will and to denounce the U.S. for their perceived support for Morsi
Hundreds of thousands of people staged demonstrations to show that his ouster was not a coup but the reflection of the people's will and to denounce the U.S. for their perceived support for Morsi
Gunmen attacked a checkpoint and killed a soldier
Militants blew up a gas pipeline to Jordan, hitting two points on the pipeline and disrupting the flow of gas
About 1,000 Morsi supporters staged a demonstration against the military coup and threw firebombs, rocks and other items from rooftops at security forces and security forces opened fire on the protesters and fired tear gas, killing 51 protesters and injuring 435
Armed supporters of former president Morsi briefly seized two soldiers, beat them, and forced them to make pro-Morsi and anti-army statements
Militants attacked a police checkpoint
Militants shelled a police base with mortar rounds and fired a truck-mounted heavy machine gun, and 2 people being killed
Gunmen on a motorcycle opened fire on a church, and one person was wounded
More than 1,000 Morsi supporters protested outside the presidential palace and chanted against el-Sissi
Gunmen opened fire on the car of a senior military commander leading to clashes with security forces, and a girl was killed; one gunman was arrested
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters demonstrated in protests called by the Muslim Brotherhood to call for his return to power
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters demonstrated in protests called by the Muslim Brotherhood to call for his return to power
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters demonstrated in protests called by the Muslim Brotherhood to call for his return to power
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters demonstrated in protests called by the Muslim Brotherhood to call for his return to power
Thousands of Morsi opponents staged counter-demonstrations in Tahrir Square and outside the presidential palace against pro-Morsi protests on the same day
Gunmen killed a police conscript and wounded an officer when they tried to stop the gunmen's vehicle
Militants fired an RPG at an armored car at a security checkpoint, killing a police officer
Gunmen exchanged fire with members of the army after they tried to blow up a police vehicle with explosives
Hundreds of Morsi supporters protested to demand his return and police fired tear gas, and the protesters threw rocks in response to the police, who fired more tear gas
Militants killed three workers from a cement factory when they accidently fired on a bus when trying to attack a police vehicle
Militants fired rocket-propelled grenades at a security checkpoint, wounding six policemen and two civilians
Morsi supporters clashed with police, and seven people were killed and several hundred were arrested
Morsi supporters clashed with police, and seven people were killed and several hundred were arrested
Several thousands protesters staged a demonstration, shouting anti-government slogans and waving banners
Gunmen shot and killed a policemen standing outside a police station
Gunmen attacked two security checkpoints
Several dozen residents held a counter-protest near a pro-Morsi protest
Gunmen killed a policeman outside his home
Three gunmen attacked a police station, wounding three policemen in a gun battle
A policeman was wounded in a drive-by shooting targeting a police water truck
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters demonstrated to call for his reinstatement
Several thousand supporters of Morsi's overthrow demonstrated, chanting pro-army slogans and setting off fireworks
A man was stabbed and hospitalized when a crowd of Morsi supporters found out he was a policeman in civilian clothing
Islamist Morsi supporters threw rocks at Morsi opponents, and police arrested six
Militants fired rockets at an army checkpoint, killing two civilians and wounding one
Two police stations were hit with heavy machine gun fire
Militants fired rockets at an army camp
About 400 protesters marched in support of ousted President Morsi
Thousands of Morsi supporters were marching when they were attacked by people armed with guns, knives, and rocks, and three people were killed, one of which after suffocating on tear gas
2013 Egypt Government
2013 Egypt Government
Assailants threw a bomb at a police station and part of the building and a police vehicle were damaged
Protesters demonstrated against the deaths of three women killed by unidentified assailants at a Brotherhood rally
Militants attacked a police club, a police station and a security post outside a bank in a coordinated attack and engaged in a firefight with police, with 4 officers and a civilian killed
Three policemen were killed by sniper fire in a coordinated attack on an administrative building, a TV station and a police station
An assailant stabbed and wounded a Christian ambulance worker after spotting a tattoo of a cross on his wrist
A police camp came under attack by militants, who fired rocket-propelled grenades at the building, wounding four civilians and six soldiers
Hundreds of Morsi supporters marched to the public prosecutor's office and the defense ministry
Several hundred Morsi supporters held a march against alleged American meddling in Egypt's affairs and clashed with anti-Morsi protesters, throwing rocks and exchanging gunfire, with one person killed and several wounded
Pro-Morsi demonstrators and Morsi opponents threw rocks at each other and exchanged gunfire, killing nine people and wounding dozens and police fired tear gas to disperse the clashes and shot and killed one protester
Pro-Morsi demonstrators and Morsi opponents threw rocks at each other and exchanged gunfire, killing nine people and wounding dozens and police fired tear gas to disperse the clashes and shot and killed one protester
Assailants attacked a pro-Morsi sit in
Islamic militants attacked security checkpoints in Sheikh Zuweyid and el-Arish, killing a civilian and a soldier and wounding three
Islamic militants attacked security checkpoints in Sheikh Zuweyid and el-Arish, killing a civilian and a soldier and wounding three
An explosive device went off outside a police station, killing one and injuring twenty eight, and police forces exchanged gunfire with unidentified people inside a nearby abandoned building after the attack
 and clashed with rival protesters in Alexandria and other places and eight people were killed and police fired tear gas in Alexandria to disperse the clashes
 and clashed with rival protesters in Alexandria and other places and eight people were killed and police fired tear gas in Alexandria to disperse the clashes
 and clashed with rival protesters in Alexandria and other places and eight people were killed and police fired tear gas in Alexandria to disperse the clashes
 and clashed with rival protesters in Alexandria and other places and eight people were killed and police fired tear gas in Alexandria to disperse the clashes
 and clashed with rival protesters in Alexandria and other places and eight people were killed and police fired tear gas in Alexandria to disperse the clashes
A pro-Morsi demonstration was held and clashes erupted with rival sides throwing rocks at each other and gunshots were fired, killing 81 people
Militants attacked a military location with rockets and mortars, killing an army commando
Clashes broke out at a funeral of a Morsi supporter after mourners began chanting anti-Sisi slogans and one person was killed
Mourners at the funeral of a young Morsi supporter opened fire on a church during the funeral and burned a police car and smashed the windows of shops that were displaying pictures of General Sisi and one person was killed
Street vendors and shop owners brawled over space, leading to the deaths of 15 people, including 13 who died in a fire
Thousands of Morsi supporters staged a march, chanting slogans against coup leader General Abdel Fattah el-Sisi
A policeman was killed in a shooting attack
A policeman was killed in a shooting attack
Armed men attacked a military building, killing a soldier
A police conscript was shot and killed
1,000 Morsi supporters staged a protest and police fired tear gas to disperse them after they tried to storm the Media City compound and the protesters threw tear gas cannisters and rocks at the police and several dozen protesters were arrested
Residents clashed with Morsi supporters who were trying to set up a new protest area
Thousands of Morsi supporters held a protest vigil to demand the return of Morsi to power, setting up tents and blocking traffic
Gunmen shot at an army checkpoint outside a military building, killing one soldier
Gunmen attacked a military checkpoint outside a bank, wounding two soldiers
Gunmen shot and killed pro-military politician Abdel Hamid Selmi
Hundreds of Bedouin tribesmen tore down a podium used by supporters of Morsi to protest against the killing of a Bedouin politician
A mob of thousands ransacked Christian homes and stores and tried to storm a church after an argument between a Muslim and a Christian in a coffee shop
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters staged protests all over Egypt denouncing the coup, threw rocks at Morsi opponents, and clashed with police in several places, who fired tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters staged protests all over Egypt denouncing the coup, threw rocks at Morsi opponents, and clashed with police in several places, who fired tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters staged protests all over Egypt denouncing the coup, threw rocks at Morsi opponents, and clashed with police in several places, who fired tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters staged protests all over Egypt denouncing the coup, threw rocks at Morsi opponents, and clashed with police in several places, who fired tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters staged protests all over Egypt denouncing the coup, threw rocks at Morsi opponents, and clashed with police in several places, who fired tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters staged protests all over Egypt denouncing the coup, threw rocks at Morsi opponents, and clashed with police in several places, who fired tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters staged protests all over Egypt denouncing the coup, threw rocks at Morsi opponents, and clashed with police in several places, who fired tear gas
Hundreds of Morsi supporters held a demonstration, waving Egyptian flags and carrying pictures of the deposed leader
A pro-Morsi march turned violent, shots were fired, rocks were thrown, and residents smashed the shopfront of a department store owned by Islamists and police fired tear gas to break up the clashes
Hundreds of Morsi supporters staged a demonstration and smashed the doors and beat up the patrons at a caf_ where al-Sisi's picture was hanging
Morsi supporters rioted, smashing the doors and beating up the patrons at a caf_ where Sisi's picture was hanging and storming a police station, looting furniture and equipment, with at least 1 person killed in the rioting
A Coptic church was torched
Protesters set three police cars on fire
Morsi supporters were working on setting up a protest tent when police went in and fired tear gas and gunshots to disperse them
A police captain was abducted by Morsi supporters
Morsi supporters opened fire on passing cars and pedestrians, and police fired tear gas to chase them away
A Coptic church was torched
Assailants torched the Saint Ibram and Virgin Mary church and the Saint Mina church in what are seen as acts of retaliation against Copts
Vandals looted the Malawi Museum of various artifacts, and a ticket agent at the museum was killed during the looting
Assailants threw firebombs at Mar Gergiss church and burned it down, in what is seen as an act of retaliation against Copts
Clashes erupted between Morsi loyalists and security forces in many provinces all over Egypt and in Assiut, police used tear gas to disperse Morsi supporters
Clashes erupted between Morsi loyalists and security forces in many provinces all over Egypt and in Assiut, police used tear gas to disperse Morsi supporters
Clashes erupted between Morsi loyalists and security forces in many provinces all over Egypt and in Assiut, police used tear gas to disperse Morsi supporters
Clashes erupted between Morsi loyalists and security forces in many provinces all over Egypt and in Assiut, police used tear gas to disperse Morsi supporters
Clashes erupted between Morsi loyalists and security forces in many provinces all over Egypt and in Assiut, police used tear gas to disperse Morsi supporters
Clashes erupted between Morsi loyalists and security forces in many provinces all over Egypt and in Assiut, police used tear gas to disperse Morsi supporters
Clashes erupted between Morsi loyalists and security forces in many provinces all over Egypt and in Assiut, police used tear gas to disperse Morsi supporters
Hundreds of Morsi supporters blocked roads and chanted slogans in support of Morsi
The Muslim Brotherhood held a protest march against the military, and some protesters stabbed a taxi driver to death for hanging a picture of coup leader Gen. el-Sissi and the protesters exchanged gunfire with an anti-Morsi rally, injuring several people
Islamists attacked a police facility and killed two policemen
Protesters took to the streets to denounce the police and army crackdown on protesters on 8/14
Egyptian police entered a mosque containing the bodies of several dozen killed Islamist protesters and after a brief standoff they fired tear gas
Seven soldiers were gunned down by militants in two cars at a checkpoint
Morsi supporters set fire to the Prince Tadros church
Islamists torched 2 provincial government headquarters buildings
The Muslim Brotherhood held a protest of thousands against the government and were attacked by pro-government militias
Islamists attacked a police facility
Assailants detonated explosives on train tracks between Alexandria and Marsa Matrouh
Gunmen attacked a security checkpoint and killed a police conscript
Hundreds of Islamists held a protest in the Al-Fath mosque, gunshots were exchanged, and police fired tear gas and arrested the protesters
Protesters attacked two churches
A person was killed when a group of people formed a human chain to protect a church and were attacked
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
 demonstrations to protest against a crackdown on protesters, rocks and bottles were thrown and gunshots were fired, and security forces opened fire and fired tear gas, killing at least 82 people in several locations
Islamists held a march and clashed with civilians
Militants killed a soldier in an attack on security forces
A truck carrying prisoners came under attack by several armed men, who kidnapped a police officer and then tried to free the prisoners and police officers fired tear gas and 37 prisoners suffocated to death from the tear gas
Militants killed two soldiers and a policeman
Militants killed a civilian
Several hundred people held a protest march
Two policemen were killed in a shooting attack
A policeman was killed
Militants ambushed two mini-buses carrying off-duty policemen, killing 25 of them execution-style and wounding two
Soldiers killed a journalist as his car was making a U-turn at a security checkpoint
A gunman went on a shooting spree over an apparent family dispute, shooting random passerby and killing 15 people
Gunmen killed three police and soldiers in a drive-by shooting
Dozens of anti-Morsi and anti-Mubarak protesters held a protest outside Cairo's high court to protest Mubarak's release from prison
 protest at several places and the protests turned violent and police fired tear gas
 protest at several places and the protests turned violent and police fired tear gas
 protest at several places and the protests turned violent and police fired tear gas
 protest at several places and the protests turned violent and police fired tear gas
 protest at several places and the protests turned violent and police fired tear gas
 protest at several places and the protests turned violent and police fired tear gas
Gunmen in two cars opened fire on a police station, killing 2 people
A policeman was shot and killed while on patrol
Two policemen were killed in militant attacks
Gunmen on a motorcycle opened fire on a security post, killing a soldier and wounding three
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters held organized protests against the military coup and security crackdown, and some of these protests led to clashes with anti-Morsi protesters, with five people dying and police firing tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters held organized protests against the military coup and security crackdown, and some of these protests led to clashes with anti-Morsi protesters, with five people dying and police firing tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters held organized protests against the military coup and security crackdown, and some of these protests led to clashes with anti-Morsi protesters, with five people dying and police firing tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters held organized protests against the military coup and security crackdown, and some of these protests led to clashes with anti-Morsi protesters, with five people dying and police firing tear gas
Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters held organized protests against the military coup and security crackdown, and some of these protests led to clashes with anti-Morsi protesters, with five people dying and police firing tear gas
Suspected Islamists shot and killed a Coptic Christian man
Residents angered by the past days' military-led bulldozing of 13 homes along the Gaza Strip staged a sit-in protest
Assailants hurled a bomb at a police station, wounding two civilians
Gunmen opened fire at a security checkpoint, killing a police officer and wounding three
Armed men fired rockets at a police bus, killing one policeman and wounding eight others
Two policemen were kidnapped by masked gunmen who drove off with them in a pick-up truck
A car bomb struck the convoy of Interior Minister Mohamed Ibrahim, killing one person and injuring twenty-two
Militants killed a soldier
A wedding party turned into a fight when the DJ played a song praising the military, and three bearded men among the guests got angry and damaged the loudspeakers, sparking a fight with sticks that injured seven people
Militants killed a policeman
Pro-military protesters took to the streets, cheering the army chief and denouncing a recent car bombing against the interior minister's convoy
Thousands of Morsi supporters held demonstrations to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in Alexandria and Damietta, with two people killed
Thousands of Morsi supporters held demonstrations to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in Alexandria and Damietta, with two people killed
Thousands of Morsi supporters held demonstrations to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in Alexandria and Damietta, with two people killed
Thousands of Morsi supporters held demonstrations to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in Alexandria and Damietta, with two people killed
Thousands of Morsi supporters held demonstrations to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in Alexandria and Damietta, with two people killed
Thousands of Morsi supporters held demonstrations to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in Alexandria and Damietta, with two people killed
Thousands of Morsi supporters held demonstrations to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in Alexandria and Damietta, with two people killed
Assailants hurled a grenade at the Boulaq al-Daqrour police station
Hundreds of activists staged a protest in front of the general prosecutor's office and in front of the Press Syndicate to call for the release of a detained journalist and a labor lawyer
As an Egyptian military counter-terrorism operation was being undertaken, two soldiers were killed in a nighttime attack by militants
An army officer was shot in the head in an attack on a security checkpoint in what is thought to be a retaliatory attack for an Egyptian military crackdown on militants
Two soldiers were injured in an attack on a security checkpoint in what is thought to be a retaliatory attack for an Egyptian military crackdown on militants in the Sinai
Suspected Islamic militants fired an RPG at a checkpoint, killing a soldier in what is thought to be a retaliatory attack for an Egyptian military crackdown on militants in the Sinai
Two people were killed and 10 others, including a soldier, were wounded when clashes erupted between troops and Morsi supporters
Unknown gunmen killed a soldier
Suicide bombers, members of the Jund al-Islam, rammed explosives-laden cars into Egypt's military intelligence headquarters and a security checkpoint, killing six soldiers and the two suicide bombers
Thousands of Morsi supporters took part in demonstrations called by the Anti-Coup Alliance to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in several places with one person killed and police fired tear gas in several places
Thousands of Morsi supporters took part in demonstrations called by the Anti-Coup Alliance to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in several places with one person killed and police fired tear gas in several places
Thousands of Morsi supporters took part in demonstrations called by the Anti-Coup Alliance to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in several places with one person killed and police fired tear gas in several places
Thousands of Morsi supporters took part in demonstrations called by the Anti-Coup Alliance to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in several places with one person killed and police fired tear gas in several places
Thousands of Morsi supporters took part in demonstrations called by the Anti-Coup Alliance to protest against military rule, and the protests turned violent in several places with one person killed and police fired tear gas in several places
200 protesters marched near Rabaa al-Adawiya square to protest against government violence
Militants struck a police bus with a roadside bomb, killing a police conscript and wounding nine
Gunmen shot and killed a member of Egypt's security forces as they conduced counter-insurgency operations, with 65 people arrested
Morsi supporters demonstrated in several cities, and clashes erupted between protesters and other civilians, and 30 people were arrested in Alexandria
Morsi supporters demonstrated in several cities, and clashes erupted between protesters and other civilians, and 30 people were arrested in Alexandria
Morsi supporters demonstrated in several cities, and clashes erupted between protesters and other civilians, and 30 people were arrested in Alexandria
Morsi supporters demonstrated in several cities, and clashes erupted between protesters and other civilians, and 30 people were arrested in Alexandria
Pro-Morsi protesters demonstrating against a constitutional amendment tried to prevent people from entering classes, and clashes with residents broke out
A roadside bomb struck an armored military vehicle, wounding two conscripts
Gunmen attacked a police patrol, killing a policeman and injuring two
Two gunmen shot and killed a policeman
Attackers riding a motorbike hurled a grenade at a police checkpoint, injuring two policemen and two civilians
Militants struck two armored military vehicles with a roadside bomb, injuring a soldier
Morsi supporters staged protests in several locations against the military overthrow of Morsi and clashes broke out between Morsi supporters and opponents and police arrested 14 people in Alexandria
Morsi supporters staged protests in several locations against the military overthrow of Morsi and clashes broke out between Morsi supporters and opponents and police arrested 14 people in Alexandria
Morsi supporters staged protests in several locations against the military overthrow of Morsi and clashes broke out between Morsi supporters and opponents and police arrested 14 people in Alexandria
Morsi supporters staged protests in several locations against the military overthrow of Morsi and clashes broke out between Morsi supporters and opponents and police arrested 14 people in Alexandria
Morsi supporters staged protests in several locations against the military overthrow of Morsi and clashes broke out between Morsi supporters and opponents and police arrested 14 people in Alexandria
Gunmen opened fire on a post office, wounding a young girl
Masked attackers shot and killed three policemen guarding a police station
Assailants in a car fired at a military vehicle, killing a soldier
A Coptic Bishop came under fire from unknown gunmen as he drove into a village to help resolve a dispute between Christians and Muslims, but he escaped unharmed
Gunmen opened fire near a security checkpoint, killing a civilian
The Muslim Brotherhood held a small protest against Morsi's ouster
Clashes between Morsi supporters and opponents led to the death of a teenage boy
Khaled Dawood, the spokesman for the Al-Dostour party, was stabbed
Suspected militants attacked an army convoy, killing at least two soldiers
Masked gunmen fired on a military vehicle, killing one soldier and wounding two others
Protests were held against Morsi's ouster and clashes erupted between Morsi supporters and opponents, with four people being killed and police fired live rounds and tear gas
Protests were held against Morsi's ouster and clashes erupted between Morsi supporters and opponents, with four people being killed and police fired live rounds and tear gas
Protests were held against Morsi's ouster and clashes erupted between Morsi supporters and opponents, with four people being killed and police fired live rounds and tear gas
Supporters of General Abdel Fattah al-Sisi chanted pro-military slogans outside a government complex
Police used tear gas to disperse Islamist students trying to enter Rabaa al-Adawiya Square
Morsi supporters protested against his overthrow and clashed with police and pro-government protesters, and protesters were arrested, beaten, and 57 people were killed
Morsi supporters protested against his overthrow and clashed with police and pro-government protesters, and protesters were arrested, beaten, and 57 people were killed
Morsi supporters protested against his overthrow and clashed with police and pro-government protesters, and protesters were arrested, beaten, and 57 people were killed
A suicide bomber struck provincial police headquarters, killing three policemen and wounding fifty-five
 they are coming
Gunmen exchanged fire with soldiers near the Giza pyramids, with no casualties
Masked gunmen pulled up next to a pickup truck full of troops on patrol and opened fire, killing six soldiers
Gunmen shot and killed a soldier and wounded another
Hundreds of protesters marked the killing of 26 Christians in a military crackdown and after the protest vigil ended, a few protesters marched chanting against the military and security forces fired tear gas to disperse them
Suspected militants blew up an empty military office
Three soldiers were injured in an attack on a checkpoint
A suicide bomber rammed his car into an army checkpoint, killing four soldiers and a policeman
At least nine soldiers were injured by improvised bombs that targeted their vehicles
Thousands of protesters demonstrated against the coup and protesters clashed with civilian opponents and police fired tear gas and one protester died from a heart attack
Thousands of protesters demonstrated against the coup and protesters clashed with civilian opponents and police fired tear gas and one protester died from a heart attack
Thousands of protesters demonstrated against the coup and protesters clashed with civilian opponents and police fired tear gas and one protester died from a heart attack
Thousands of protesters demonstrated against the coup and protesters clashed with civilian opponents and police fired tear gas and one protester died from a heart attack
Thousands of protesters demonstrated against the coup and protesters clashed with civilian opponents and police fired tear gas and one protester died from a heart attack
Pro-Morsi demonstrations called by the Anti-Coup Alliance were held in several places throughout Egypt
Pro-Morsi demonstrations called by the Anti-Coup Alliance were held in several places throughout Egypt
Pro-Morsi demonstrations called by the Anti-Coup Alliance were held in several places throughout Egypt
Pro-Morsi demonstrations called by the Anti-Coup Alliance were held in several places throughout Egypt
Prison detainees started a fire to force officers to open an emergency exit at a police station in an attempted jailbreak
Gunmen shot and killed a police officer as he walked near his home
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested all over Egypt against the military coup and clashes broke out in several places, with one person being injured in Fayoum province
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested all over Egypt against the military coup and clashes broke out in several places, with one person being injured in Fayoum province
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested all over Egypt against the military coup and clashes broke out in several places, with one person being injured in Fayoum province
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested all over Egypt against the military coup and clashes broke out in several places, with one person being injured in Fayoum province
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested all over Egypt against the military coup and clashes broke out in several places, with one person being injured in Fayoum province
At least 200 students and Morsi supporters marched, and on 10/20, protesters hurled stones at the university administrator's offices, smashing windows and breaking doors and police fired tear gas
A car bomb attack by the Ansar Beit al-Maqdis jihadist group outside a military intelligence building wounded six soldiers in a retaliatory attack for what it called the army's oppressive practices in Sinai
Two gunmen on a motorbike fired on a group outside a Coptic Christian church, killing four and wounding several
Militants attacked a bus with automatic weapons and injured two members of the Central Security Forces on the bus
Militants set off four roadside bombs targeting a security convoy, killing a soldier and a civilian and wounding five and then militants traded gunfire with security forces
Militants shot and killed a soldier
Suspected Islamist militants shot and killed a policeman in a drive-by shooting as he was walking to work
Thousands of Morsi supporters demonstrated, calling for Morsi to be reinstated and urging military leader Gen. el-Sissi to step down
 before scuffling with opponents inside the university
Students chanted against the military and against the military coup that removed Morsi from power and police fired tear gas and birdshot to disperse them
Gunmen opened fire on policemen, killing three
Clashes erupted between Brotherhood supporters and army supporters, injuring several students and damaging the university cafeteria
Protesting students taking part in a pro-Morsi demonstration stormed Al-Azhar University offices, ransacking them and firing birdshot
Students clashed with Morsi opponents, and seven people were injured
Brotherhood supporters and Army supporters clashed in Zagazig University, with several people being injured
Morsi supporters protested around Egypt calling for Morsi to be reinstated as president, and clashes erupted between Morsi supporters and opponents, and police fired tear gas and arrested 60
Morsi supporters protested around Egypt calling for Morsi to be reinstated as president, and clashes erupted between Morsi supporters and opponents, and police fired tear gas and arrested 60
Morsi supporters protested around Egypt calling for Morsi to be reinstated as president, and clashes erupted between Morsi supporters and opponents, and police fired tear gas and arrested 60
Morsi supporters protested around Egypt calling for Morsi to be reinstated as president, and clashes erupted between Morsi supporters and opponents, and police fired tear gas and arrested 60
Morsi supporters protested around Egypt calling for Morsi to be reinstated as president, and clashes erupted between Morsi supporters and opponents, and police fired tear gas and arrested 60
Ten people were killed in a feud between two families who went on a shooting rampage
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested against his trial and against the military, and police fired tear gas to separate them from Morsi opponents
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested against his trial and against the military, and police fired tear gas to separate them from Morsi opponents
A sniper shot and killed an Egyptian soldier while training at a military camp
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested in several cities to call for the release of detained female protesters, and 2 people were killed in clashes between Morsi supporters and opponents, and police fired tear gas
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested in several cities to call for the release of detained female protesters, and 2 people were killed in clashes between Morsi supporters and opponents, and police fired tear gas
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested in several cities to call for the release of detained female protesters, and 2 people were killed in clashes between Morsi supporters and opponents, and police fired tear gas
Thousands of Morsi supporters protested in several cities to call for the release of detained female protesters, and 2 people were killed in clashes between Morsi supporters and opponents, and police fired tear gas
Funeral mourners began chanting anti-Morsi slogans and threw gasoline bombs at a home they said belonged to a Morsi supporter who threw stones at the funeral procession, and security forces arrested four Morsi supporters
Hundreds of soccer fans without tickets tried to push past police to force their way into a stadium and threw rocks at police who fired tear gas
Gunmen in a speeding car fired on a security checkpoint, killing two soldiers and wounding three
More than 10,000 Morsi supporters took part in demonstrations against the military, and supporters fired birdshot in clashes with Morsi opponents, killing one person in Alexandria and police arrested several
More than 10,000 Morsi supporters took part in demonstrations against the military, and supporters fired birdshot in clashes with Morsi opponents, killing one person in Alexandria and police arrested several
More than 10,000 Morsi supporters took part in demonstrations against the military, and supporters fired birdshot in clashes with Morsi opponents, killing one person in Alexandria and police arrested several
Militants from Ansar Beit al-Maqdis shot and killed a senior national security officer as he headed to his office as retaliation for imprisoning female protesters
Hundreds of protesters demonstrated to commemorate the protests of November 19, 2011 and protesters threw rocks at police who fired tear gas and shots, wounding 16 protesters and killing 1
A suicide bomber rammed an explosive-laden car into one of two buses carrying off-duty soldiers , killing 11 soldiers and wounding 35
Assailants threw an explosive device at a security checkpoint, wounding four policemen
Clashes between supporters and opponents of the military led one student to be shot and killed in a dorm at Al-Azhar University with some clashes also at Cairo University
A police officer was shot and killed and one of the two assailants were arrested
 wanted for the murder of a Lieutenant Colonel, and a police officer was killed and two militants were arrested
 in reference to the August 14 crackdown on protesters and the protesters clashed in several cities, with two people killed and police fired tear gas and arrested at least 27 people
 in reference to the August 14 crackdown on protesters and the protesters clashed in several cities, with two people killed and police fired tear gas and arrested at least 27 people
 in reference to the August 14 crackdown on protesters and the protesters clashed in several cities, with two people killed and police fired tear gas and arrested at least 27 people
 in reference to the August 14 crackdown on protesters and the protesters clashed in several cities, with two people killed and police fired tear gas and arrested at least 27 people
 in reference to the August 14 crackdown on protesters and the protesters clashed in several cities, with two people killed and police fired tear gas and arrested at least 27 people
Attackers on a motorcycle threw a grenade at a police checkpoint, wounding at least one
Egyptian troops engaged in a firefight with Islamist militants, killing 3 and arresting 4
100 followers of activist Mona Seif demonstrated against an article in a revised law that allows the military to try civilians in certain cases and police used water cannon, beat several protesters and arrested many
About 100 protesters demonstrated to commemorate activist Gaber Salah who was killed by police and police fired water cannon to disperse them
About 100 protesters demonstrated against a new protest law and threw stones at police who fired tear gas to disperse them
Hundreds of secular youth activists protested against the government's clampdown on dissent
Muslims clashed with Christians over a home being built between two villages, with one Christian and two Muslims being killed
Morsi supporters demonstrated to denounce a court verdict against a group of young female protesters and security forces fired water cannon and tear gas to disperse them and one person was killed in clashes with police
One Muslim man was killed when Muslims and Christians clashed over a relationship between a Christian and a Muslim woman
Morsi supporters protested in several places, and protesters threw stones and police fired tear gas to disperse them and at least 183 were arrested
Morsi supporters protested in several places, and protesters threw stones and police fired tear gas to disperse them and at least 183 were arrested
Morsi supporters protested in several places, and protesters threw stones and police fired tear gas to disperse them and at least 183 were arrested
Morsi supporters protested in several places, and protesters threw stones and police fired tear gas to disperse them and at least 183 were arrested
Morsi supporters protested in several places, and protesters threw stones and police fired tear gas to disperse them and at least 183 were arrested
Morsi supporters protested in several places, and protesters threw stones and police fired tear gas to disperse them and at least 183 were arrested
Dozens of protesters demonstrated to call for the release of detained activists, and police fired tear gas to disperse them
Unknown gunmen shot and killed a Christian
Thousands of pro-Morsi protesters gathered in several places in Cairo to protest against the military coup, torched a police truck and threw rocks at police, who fired tear gas
Morsi supportes held protests in several places in Egypt, and police fired tear gas and arrested more than 70 protesters and clashed with protesters who threw rocks at them
Morsi supportes held protests in several places in Egypt, and police fired tear gas and arrested more than 70 protesters and clashed with protesters who threw rocks at them
Morsi supportes held protests in several places in Egypt, and police fired tear gas and arrested more than 70 protesters and clashed with protesters who threw rocks at them
2013 Egypt Government
Students staging pro-Morsi protests clashed with police who fired tear gas and arrested many
Students staging pro-Morsi protests clashed with police who fired tear gas and arrested many
Students staging pro-Morsi protests clashed with police who fired tear gas and arrested many
Hundreds of students went on strike in solidarity with university staff members who were beaten by security forces
A car bomb exploded near an Egyptian police building, killing one policeman and wounding 35 others
Pro-Morsi protesters calling for the release of detained protesters clashed with Morsi opponents all over Egypt, killing 2 protesters and police fired tear gas and arrested dozens
Pro-Morsi protesters calling for the release of detained protesters clashed with Morsi opponents all over Egypt, killing 2 protesters and police fired tear gas and arrested dozens
Pro-Morsi protesters calling for the release of detained protesters clashed with Morsi opponents all over Egypt, killing 2 protesters and police fired tear gas and arrested dozens
Pro-Morsi protesters calling for the release of detained protesters clashed with Morsi opponents all over Egypt, killing 2 protesters and police fired tear gas and arrested dozens
Pro-Morsi protesters calling for the release of detained protesters clashed with Morsi opponents all over Egypt, killing 2 protesters and police fired tear gas and arrested dozens
Hundreds of activists rallied near Tahrir Square to commemorate bloody clashes between protesters and security forces two years ago
University students protested against the government all over Egypt and threw rocks at security forces who fired tear gas and arrested many
University students protested against the government all over Egypt and threw rocks at security forces who fired tear gas and arrested many
University students protested against the government all over Egypt and threw rocks at security forces who fired tear gas and arrested many
University students protested against the government all over Egypt and threw rocks at security forces who fired tear gas and arrested many
An Islamist militant blew himself up in his hideout to escape arrest, wounding an officer in the process
Militants killed 2 soldiers in a gunfight and paraded the corpse of one soldier killed through the streets while it hung from a pole
Morsi supporters turned out for their weekly protest to call for his reinstatement and clashed with police who fired tear gas
Morsi supporters turned out for their weekly protest to call for his reinstatement and clashed with police who fired tear gas
Morsi supporters turned out for their weekly protest to call for his reinstatement and clashed with police who fired tear gas
A suicide bombing by Ansar Beit al-Maqdis militants outside an Egyptian police headquarters killed at least 15 people
Crowds torched a bus belonging to a tourism company, saying its employees had made pro-Islamist salutes and ransacked a supermarket believed to belong to Muslim Brotherhood sympathizers
A bomb exploded near a bus wounding five people
Dozens of protesters chanted slogans against the Muslim Brotherhood after a bus bomb attack
Islamist protesters held demonstrations in several cities that led to clashes with police who fired tear gas and water cannon, and 5 were killed and 265 were arrested
Islamist protesters held demonstrations in several cities that led to clashes with police who fired tear gas and water cannon, and 5 were killed and 265 were arrested
Islamist protesters held demonstrations in several cities that led to clashes with police who fired tear gas and water cannon, and 5 were killed and 265 were arrested
Islamist protesters held demonstrations in several cities that led to clashes with police who fired tear gas and water cannon, and 5 were killed and 265 were arrested
A student was killed by police and 101 arrested as police clashed with pro-Morsi students who set fire to a university building and police also clashed with protesting students in Zagazig and Assiut
A student was killed by police and 101 arrested as police clashed with pro-Morsi students who set fire to a university building and police also clashed with protesting students in Zagazig and Assiut
A student was killed by police and 101 arrested as police clashed with pro-Morsi students who set fire to a university building and police also clashed with protesting students in Zagazig and Assiut
A bomb attack near an army intelligence building wounded four soldiers
Members of the Muslim Brotherhood held a march and clashed with police outside a church
Suspected militants blew up a gas pipeline
Pro-Morsi students protesting the new military-installed government are fired on by police.
Pro-Morsi students protesting the new military-installed government are fired on by police.
A coalition of pro-Morsi supporters demonstrate against military rule. Police respond violently killing 17.
A coalition of pro-Morsi supporters demonstrate against military rule. Police respond violently killing 17.
Islamist militants kill one Egyptian soldier and wound 2 others in a roadside bomb attack.
Doctors strike periodically over the course of several months demanding better pay.
An Egyptian Labor Ministry official and three trade union activists were kidnapped in Sinai.
Unidentified assailants threw a bomb and opened fire on a traffic police station in Cairo.
Supporters and opponents of Morsi clash violently in Cairo and Suez.
Supporters and opponents of Morsi clash violently in Cairo and Suez.
Police fire teargas and arrest pro-Morsi University students protesting in Cairo.
Pro-Morsi supporters protest against a constitutional referendum.
Pro-Morsi supporters protest against a constitutional referendum.
Pro-Morsi supporters protest against a constitutional referendum.
As Egyptians go to the polls to vote on a referendum a bomb explodes outside a court in Cairo.
Ansar Beit al-Maqdis militants blow up a gas pipeline in Sinai.
Militant Islamists in the Sinai launch a rocket attack on the Israeli resort town of Eilat.
Thousands of pro-Military supporters hold a rally to call on General Sissi to run for president.
An Al-Jazeera reporter detained since August 2013 goes on a 5+ month hunger strike to protest his detainment.
Masked gunmen kill 5 policemen at a checkpoint south of Cairo.
Pro-Morsi supporters and Pro-Military supporters clash in cities around Egypt killing dozens.
Pro-Morsi supporters and Pro-Military supporters clash in cities around Egypt killing dozens.
Pro-Morsi supporters and Pro-Military supporters clash in cities around Egypt killing dozens.
A car bomb targets police headquarters in Cairo killing 6. Two German reporters covering the bombing were attacked by an angry mob. A day later an RPG is fired at a police station.
Militants shoot down a military helicopter with a surface-to-air missile killing 5. Military forces retaliate killing 21 militants
Militants attack a bus transporting Egyptian soldiers killing 4 and wounding 9.
Ansar Beit al-Maqdis militants blow up a gas pipeline in Sinai.
A police general is assassinated by militants outside his home in Cairo. 1 policeman is killed in a drive by shooting outside a church in West Cairo.
Two roadside bombs target a police car slightly injuring one officer.
A car bomb is detonated near a government building and targeting Egyptian soldiers wounds 3 civilians.
Six Egyptian policemen were wounded in a bomb attack. Islamists protesters clash with police leading to 2 deaths.
Military forces kill 16 militants in airstrikes
More than 22,000 workers strike for the removal of company president and better wages as a government-operated textile company.
Militants blow up a gas pipeline and shoot dead two police officers in separate cities. The next day, an attack in Ismailia killed three police officers.
Militants blow up a gas pipeline and shoot dead two police officers in separate cities. The next day, an attack in Ismailia killed three police officers.
Militants blow up a gas pipeline and shoot dead two police officers in separate cities. The next day, an attack in Ismailia killed three police officers.
Militants blow up a gas pipeline and shoot dead two police officers in separate cities. The next day, an attack in Ismailia killed three police officers.
Police strike for better pay amid increasingly violent working conditions.
Pro-Morsi supporters clash with police resulting in 2 deaths.
Pro-Morsi supporters clash with police resulting in 2 deaths.
Pro-Morsi supporters clash with police resulting in 2 deaths.
3 South Korean tourists and an Egyptian bus driver are killed when a bomb goes off in a tour bus near the border with Israel.
Lawyers for Morsi walk out of the court in protest after the defendants are placed in a sound proof glass cage.
Egyptian military forces launch helicopter gunship attacks on militants in Northern Sinai killing at least 10.
Notaries join other state paid employees by striking for better pay.
Gunmen shoot and killed Lieutenant Colonel Mohamed Eid outside his house.
Militants blow up a gas pipeline in the Sinai Peninsula
Gunmen kill a police officer who was on a team guarding a prominent judge.
Pro-Morsi supporters hold scattered protests denouncing the military-backed government. Police use tear gas to disperse crowds, however, 1 protestor was killed.
Pro-Morsi supporters hold scattered protests denouncing the military-backed government. Police use tear gas to disperse crowds, however, 1 protestor was killed.
Pro-Morsi supporters hold scattered protests denouncing the military-backed government. Police use tear gas to disperse crowds, however, 1 protestor was killed.
2 policemen were shot and killed and 4 others wounded in attacks across the country.
2 policemen were shot and killed and 4 others wounded in attacks across the country.
More than 40 women hold a sit-in in Cairo International Airport after being denied access to Gaza as part of a World Women's Day delegation.
Pro-Morsi supporters protest in cities around Egypt clashing with supporters of the military government and security forces. 3 people are killed and dozens more wounded.
Pro-Morsi supporters protest in cities around Egypt clashing with supporters of the military government and security forces. 3 people are killed and dozens more wounded.
Pro-Morsi supporters protest in cities around Egypt clashing with supporters of the military government and security forces. 3 people are killed and dozens more wounded.
Pro-Morsi supporters protest in cities around Egypt clashing with supporters of the military government and security forces. 3 people are killed and dozens more wounded.
Three prominent youth activists were beaten by guards prior to their hearing after complaining their handcuffs were too tight.
A militant bombing suspect was killed by police when security forces attempted to arrest the man.
Gunmen shoot 4 police officers escorting a military bus killing 1.
Masked gunmen kill 6 soldiers at a Cairo checkpoint.
6 jihadists and 2 soldiers are killed in a raid on militants north of Cairo.
Thousands of student supporters of Morsi protest nationwide and clash with Egyptian police resulting in 2 deaths.
Thousands of student supporters of Morsi protest nationwide and clash with Egyptian police resulting in 2 deaths.
Thousands of student supporters of Morsi protest nationwide and clash with Egyptian police resulting in 2 deaths.
Defense lawyers for 683 Islamist protesters boycott the mass trial for lack of due process. University students clash with police over the sentencing of 529 Morsi supporters to death.
Defense lawyers for 683 Islamist protesters boycott the mass trial for lack of due process. University students clash with police over the sentencing of 529 Morsi supporters to death.
Hundreds protest ex-army chief Abdel Fattah al-Sisi bid for presidency. 5 are killed and more wounded in violent repression.
Hundreds protest ex-army chief Abdel Fattah al-Sisi bid for presidency. 5 are killed and more wounded in violent repression.
In two separate attacks, militants killed a retired Colonel and attacked a military bus transporting policemen killing the soldier driving the bus.
Pro-Morsi students clash with police in cities across Egypt resulting in more than 30 wounded. Several bombs target security posts at Cairo University killing a police general.
Pro-Morsi students clash with police in cities across Egypt resulting in more than 30 wounded. Several bombs target security posts at Cairo University killing a police general.
Pro-Morsi students clash with police in cities across Egypt resulting in more than 30 wounded. Several bombs target security posts at Cairo University killing a police general.
Pro-Morsi students clash with police in cities across Egypt resulting in more than 30 wounded. Several bombs target security posts at Cairo University killing a police general.
Tribal violence sparked by a sexual assault leaves 26 killed and dozens more wounded in Aswan province.
Dozens of journalists hold a 1-day strike demanding that security forces protect journalists covering protests.
Military forces kill a prominent Ansar Beit al-Maqdis Militant in Northern Sinai.
Militants from the Muslim Brotherhood attack a police checkpoint. 2 militants were killed.
A crude bomb exploded near a newly built hospital minutes before it was to be inaugurated by the Health Minister. No injuries or deaths were reported.
Student supporters of Morsi protest at Cairo University and the University of Zagizig. Clashes escalated resulting in the death of 1 student and 16 others arrested.
Student supporters of Morsi protest at Cairo University and the University of Zagizig. Clashes escalated resulting in the death of 1 student and 16 others arrested.
Several bomb attacks against traffic Police cause injuries and 1 death.
Unknown assailants open fire on a patrol car killing 2 police officers.
A jihadist group kills a police brigadier general by detonating a bomb under his car. A second police officer was killed during a raid on militants in Alexandria.
A jihadist group kills a police brigadier general by detonating a bomb under his car. A second police officer was killed during a raid on militants in Alexandria.
Supporters of ousted president Mohamed Morsi demonstrate against the military installed government. Clashes with police result in 2 deaths.
Multiple bomb attacks target police and soldiers killing 3 people in Cairo and the town of Al-Tur.
Multiple bomb attacks target police and soldiers killing 3 people in Cairo and the town of Al-Tur.
Supporters and opponents of Morsi clash violently in Alexandria resulting in 2 deaths.
Two policemen riding on a motorcycle were shot dead by unknown gunmen.
Student supporters of Mohamed Morsi hold a number of demonstrations across the country clashing with police in some cases.
Student supporters of Mohamed Morsi hold a number of demonstrations across the country clashing with police in some cases.
Student supporters of Mohamed Morsi hold a number of demonstrations across the country clashing with police in some cases.
Militants bomb an armored police vehicle injuring 7 police conscripts and several civilians. A gunfight ensued but the assailants escaped.
Unidentified gunmen kill the main leader of a militant group.
A group of arms traffickers kills six Egyptian border guards after crossing the border from Libya into Egypt.
A mob of Islamic extremists burn down shops owned by Coptic Christians in protest of a young Coptic man accused of blasphemy.
A crowd of men sexually assault a young woman in Tahrir Square.
Supporters of ousted president Mohamed Morsi demonstrate against military rule and clash with police. One officer is killed by an unidentified gunman.
Two Coptic Christians are kidnapped in separate attacks by unidentified militants.
A police operation to arrest several members of the Muslim brotherhood leaves one officer dead.
Supporters of ousted president Mohamed Morsi demonstrate and clash with pro-military demonstrators and security forces leaving 2 protesters dead and 8 wounded.
Unidentified militants set off 5 bombs at various metro stations around Cairo causing 4 injuries and no deaths.
An Arab family kills two Nubian men, set their bodies on fire and left them in a donkey cart in renewed ethnic conflict.
Militants force a truck full of policemen to stop before opening fire and killing 4.
A teenager and her mother were killed by a bomb blast in a construction site.
Two police officers were killed while trying to defuse bombs outside the presidential palace in Cairo.
A briefcase bomb explodes on a train injuring five civilians.
Hundreds protest on the anniversary of the military coup that deposed Muslim Brotherhood President Mohamed Morsi. Police quickly suppress demonstrations with tear gas and arrests.
Hundreds protest on the anniversary of the military coup that deposed Muslim Brotherhood President Mohamed Morsi. Police quickly suppress demonstrations with tear gas and arrests.
Hundreds protest on the anniversary of the military coup that deposed Muslim Brotherhood President Mohamed Morsi. Police quickly suppress demonstrations with tear gas and arrests.
Military forces kill 17 militants in the Sinai Peninsula on the anniversary of the coup.
2 militants set off a bomb near a Cairo Military Hospital. 1 of the militants was captured by police.
Some taxi drivers go on strike over the steep rise in fuel costs due to the reduction of government subsidies.
Pro-Morsi supporters demonstrate with security forces after Friday prayers.
A mini-bus driver is arrested after raping a Russian tourist.
Militants fire mortar rounds at a military post in El-Arish killing 1 soldier and 7 civilians.
Militants attack a border checkpoint with machine guns and RPGs killing 22 soldiers.
Two police and army brigadiers are shot by unidentified militants on their commute home.
Military forces kill 14 militants in operations in the Sinai. The following day a mortar lands on a civilian home killing 4 children.
Military forces kill 7 in operations in the Sinai. The next day a militant rocket attack against soldiers hits a civilian home killing a 9-year old girl.
Militants attack a MFO mission camp in Sinai wounding a U.S. Soldier.
Military forces kill 11 militants in North Sinai.
Unidentified militants kill 5 police at a military checkpoint. Four militants are killed in the gun battle.
An American energy worker is killed in an apparent carjacking in the desert between Qarun and Karama.
Pro-Morsi supporters clash with police and pro-military supporters. 1 person is killed in the violence.
A British citizen is raped by a 35-year old Egyptian man.
Islamists organize protests to commemorate the police crackdown in Rabaa al-Adawiya and Nahda squares 1 year prior.
Unidentified gunmen open fire on a police patrol in the province of Gharbiya.
A prominent activist begins a hunger strike to protest his imprisonment. Other prisoners join into the hunger strike.
Militants kill four men suspected of being supporters of the Egyptian Army.
Ansar Beit al-Maqdis militants behead four men who they claim were Israeli Informants.
A video surfaces showing three police officers taunting the corpse of a fugitive.
Hundreds gather to mourn the death of a prominent civil rights lawyer chanting and waving photos of Ahmed Seif.
A roadside bomb struck an armored vehicle killing 11 police officers. The following day gunmen shoot and kill another police officer in Sinai.
A roadside bomb struck an armored vehicle killing 11 police officers. The following day gunmen shoot and kill another police officer in Sinai.
Military and police forces attack and kill 7 jihadists. In retaliation, militants kill 6 policemen in a roadside bomb attack between Rafah and El-Arish.
Military and police forces attack and kill 7 jihadists. In retaliation, militants kill 6 policemen in a roadside bomb attack between Rafah and El-Arish.
Military and police forces attack and kill 7 jihadists. In retaliation, militants kill 6 policemen in a roadside bomb attack between Rafah and El-Arish.
Hundreds of Coptic Christians demonstrate in front of a police station demanding authorities locate an abducted housewife. Events escalates when demonstrators throw Molotov cocktails.
The decapitated body of an unidentified man was found in the desert in Sinai.
Military forces shot at 3 Palestinian men who tried to enter Egypt through a smuggling tunnel. 1 was killed.
Unidentified assailants kill two police officers and two civilians in a bomb attack at a checkpoint outside the Foreign Ministry.
Military forces kill four militants in an artillery strike in the Sinai Peninsula.
A 13-year old boy is killed after discovering a roadside bomb.
A military offensive in the Sinai Peninsula results in 16 militants killed. A prominent militant leader is also killed during the offensive.
A military offensive in the Sinai Peninsula results in 16 militants killed. A prominent militant leader is also killed during the offensive.
Police arrest 40 members of the Muslim Brotherhood for anti-government protests. Student protesters smash metal detectors and clash with police on college campuses.
Police arrest 40 members of the Muslim Brotherhood for anti-government protests. Student protesters smash metal detectors and clash with police on college campuses.
A bomb blast in a busy district of Cairo injures 12 and results in no fatalities.
An 8-year old girl is raped while walking home from school.
Two bombs strike a mosque during a Sufi Muslim festival wounding 11 and causing no fatalities.
A roadside bomb killed 3 policemen and wounded 9 others.
7 Egyptian soldiers are killed and more wounded when a roadside bomb explodes next to their armored vehicle.
Attackers inside Egypt fired an anti-tank missile and automatic rifles at an Israeli military vehicle across the border injuring 2.
A bomb explodes near the gates of Cairo University wounding police officers and civilians.
A suicide car bomb attack kills 30 Egyptian soldiers in the Sinai Peninsula. Gunmen kill an officer and wound two others. Military forces kill 8 in subsequent operations.
The mother and sister of two jailed Egyptian activists go on hunger strike to protest their imprisonment.
A roadside IED wounds 7 Egyptian soldiers in the Sinai Peninsula. A separate bomb goes off 3 days later in the same region.
Students protest government negligence after 11 female university students were killed in an automobile accident.
Two policemen and two civilians were killed when a bomb exploded in a train car in Cairo.
Two bombs go off in different areas of Cairo causing some injuries and no fatalities.
Morsi supporters demonstrate after Friday prayers before clashing with civilians and police.
10 people are injured when a car bomb is detonated by Police.
Four militant boats attack an Egyptian Naval vessel in the Mediterranean. All four boats are sunk and 32 militants arrested. 8 sailors missing at sea.
Militants kill 5 police and soldiers in the Sinai. Military forces retaliate and kill 3 militants in air strikes.
Militants kill 5 police and soldiers in the Sinai. Military forces retaliate and kill 3 militants in air strikes.
A bomb on a Cairo metro train injures 7.
7 civilians and 3 militants are killed in an exchange of fire in the town of Rafah.
A militant is killed when a bomb he is planting by a train station explodes.
Islamist protesters clash with police leaving several protesters dead.
Gunmen shoot and kill an Egyptian Army brigadier general. 2 other soldiers are killed in a separate attack.
Around 2,000 soccer fans storm a stadium after a truck rams through a gate.
Dozens of Muslim Brotherhood members clash with police in the Kafr al-Sheikh province leaving one protestor killed.
Two police officers were killed in a drive-by shooting.
Police raid a farm where militants were hiding and preparing bombs killing 5.
Gunmen on a motorcycle shoot and seriously wound an Egyptian Military Officer.
Two soldiers are killed in a roadside bomb attack.
Militants shoot at a police checkpoint. Police return fire killing 2.
Gunmen on a motorcycle shoot and kill a police officer guarding a bank.
Gunmen in a minibus open fire on Police officers killing 1 and wounding 3.
Egyptian blogger hospitalized after a 78 day hunger strike protesting alleged wrongful imprisonment.
Egyptian border guards fire over into Gazan territory and kill one civilian, reasons unknown.
Police officer killed while defusing a bomb planted by Ajnad Misr to target police.
Unknown gunmen attack and kill two police officers while on a pre-dawn patrol.
Police officer's body found after army conducts raids on "terrorists" in the North Sinai region. 
Police officer's body found after army conducts raids on "terrorists" in the North Sinai region. 
Police officer's body found after army conducts raids on "terrorists" in the North Sinai region. 
Egyptian jihadists attack a Sinai pipeline over Jordan's involvement in US-led operations against the Islamic State. 
Unknown assailant threw a bomb in the main entrance of the presidential palace injuring one.
Protesters in Alexandria and Cairo demonstrate ahead of 2011 anniversary of uprising, police disperse with birdshot killing at least 2. 
Protesters in Alexandria and Cairo demonstrate ahead of 2011 anniversary of uprising, police disperse with birdshot killing at least 2. 
Ajnad Misr place bomb in a Cairo neighborhood targeting police and civilians. 
Pro-morsi protests are dispersed by police, killing at least 20.
Pro-morsi protests are dispersed by police, killing at least 20.
Unknown assailant places a bomb in central Cairo to target police, 1 wounded.
A bomb carried by alleged Muslim Brotherhood members explodes in the car transporting it to its unknown final destination.
A series of car bomb and rockets targeted at Army and Police carried out by militants kill at least 30. 
A series of car bomb and rockets targeted at Army and Police carried out by militants kill at least 30. 
A series of car bomb and rockets targeted at Army and Police carried out by militants kill at least 30. 
Army and jihadists clash a day after attacks on police and the Army kill around 30, government blames Muslim Brotherhood. 
Bomb explodes in Alexandria placed by unknown actors targeting police. Two bombs were diffused at Cairo International Airport. 
Bomb explodes in Alexandria placed by unknown actors targeting police. Two bombs were diffused at Cairo International Airport. 
Army fired into Palestinian territory at Hamas outposts after the Egyptian government officially bans Hamas.
Clashes between football fans and police end deadly after attempts to rush into the stadium. 
A string of small bombs throughout Alexandria targeting police wound 10, 0 deaths. 
Two car bombs detonate after police fire on the vehicles killing the suicide bombers, wounding several. 
Gunmen open fire on police at a traffic stop. 
Islamists protest in el Matariya district in Cairo, police arrest one and are arrested two later on charges of killing the man while in police custody. 
A series of four bombs placed by Islamist militants in residential areas and outside a police station kill one and wound several. 
Militants place bombs that kill 2 and wound several. 
Militants place bomb outside supreme court, kill 2 wound several. 
Militants place bomb outside store killing one. 
Militants place bomb outside police station and store killing one, wounding 9. 
Three soldiers killed after unknown gunmen detonated a bombed after soldiers drive by.
Militants place road side bomb near a check point and killed 3 and seriously injuring another. 
Ansar Beit all-Maqdis suicide bomber rams a vehicle full of explosives into a police base, killing one civilians. 
Soldiers were killed after they drove over a roadside bomb while pursuing militants.
Militants attack soldiers at a checkpoint near the Gaza border. 
Bomb kills street cleaner, likely targeting a tram track in a pro-morsi neighborhood. 
Unknown assailants threw bomb at the entrance of a Cairo youth center killing two.
Gunmen shoot and kill a police officer in the north of the Sinai peninsula.
A roadside bomb kills two soldiers in the Sinai peninsula. 
A 10 year old girl is killed when she picks up a rudimentary bomb placed outside her school by unknown militants in the Faiyum province. 
A rudimentary bomb was placed outside the exit of the metro station that serves Cairo University, wounding four students and four policemen. No deaths reported. 
Militants attack five separate checkpoints in the Sinai peninsula, killing 15 soldiers and 2 civilians. Approximately 15 militants were killed in the exchange, exact numbers cannot be verified. 
The Egyptian affiliate of IS kill a captured soldier and another captive from the April 2 attacks. Upload video of the execution.
Police raid a radio station of human rights organization, Andalus Institute for Tolerance and Anti-Violence Studies, detaining the director Ahmed Samih. Ahmed Samih claims this is repression of dissent, authorities claim the Institute is being investigate for broadcasting without a license. 
A bomb placed on the May 15 bridge in a Cairo neighborhood explodes, killing one police officer and wounding several civilians. Authorities claim later the head of the group was killed.
A string of related attacks kill 11 civilians and two soldiers in the northern Sinai peninsula. Mortars kill several civilians in residential areas and a roadside bomb kills two soldiers. 
A string of related attacks kill 11 civilians and two soldiers in the northern Sinai peninsula. Mortars kill several civilians in residential areas and a roadside bomb kills two soldiers. 
Egyptian affiliate kill at least 14 people in two bomb attacks in the northern region of the Sinai Peninsula.
Militant sniper attacks soldiers at a check point near the Israeli border, killing one. 
Gunmen on a motorcycle shoot a police officer manning a checkpoint outside Cairo, killing him. 
Bomb blast kills two Egyptian military cadets, wounding 10 others. 
Roadside bomb kills one officer and wounding another in the north Sinai Peninsula. 
A string of attacks, mortar fire and roadside bomb kills 5, two civilian children and 3 soldiers. Mortar fire killed the two children in Sheikh Zuweid and a roadside bomb killed the three soldier near Rafah.
A string of attacks, mortar fire and roadside bomb kills 5, two civilian children and 3 soldiers. Mortar fire killed the two children in Sheikh Zuweid and a roadside bomb killed the three soldier near Rafah.
Four suspected Muslim Brotherhood islamists are killed in an accidental explosion while preparing bombs. 
Militants attack a security checkpoint and camp in Rafah with mortars and bombs, causalities not reported. 
Soldiers kill three Palestinian gunmen as they infiltrated through a smuggling tunnel in Sinai. Officials say armed Palestinians and the army clashed in the buffer zone and accused the Palestinian of being tied to Hamas. 
Pro-Morsi demonstrators clashed with police during a night-time rally when policy arrested a group of the demonstrators. One officer was killed during the clashes and 22 people were wounded. 
Two police officers are killed in a drive-by shooting in the Sinai Peninsula, gunmen are suspected Islamic militants. 
Two police officers are killed in different parts of El-Arish by unknown but suspect Islamic Militants.
Suspected Islamic militants set off three small bombs outside a Judge's Cairo home following the sentencing of Islamists to death. The bombs wounded four people and caused property damage.
Two suspects were killed in a firefights after a failed bomb attack against a Judge in Cairo. The suspects were killed during a firefight when police went to arrest them.
Bomb attacks killed four soldiers and three civilians in Rafah.
Unknown gunmen kill two judges, a prosecutor and a driver in El-Arish hours after the death sentencing of Mohamed Morsi.
Unknown gunmen shoot and kill police officer.
Army conscript is killed amid clashes with Sinai Province militants the Egyptian affiliate of IS, wounding an officer. 
Brig. General Ahmed Ibrahim of the police is killed in the North Sinai province on the way back from a join police and army raid.
A joint raided of police and the army target the Sinai Province of the Islamic State in El-Arish. Exact details on the size of the joint effort and causalities were not reported.
Suspected Islamic militant blow up a natural gas pipeline in El-Arish.
Gunmen on a motorcycle shoot two police officers near the Giza pyramids. 
The Egyptian branch of IS releases a video of jihadists killing a man they accused as a policy spy. Exact identity of the man is unconfirmed.
Militants attack a military checkpoint, shooting and killing one conscript and wounding several. In a second attack, militants detonate a bomb when an armored vehicle passed, wounding four. 
Militants attack a military checkpoint, shooting and killing one conscript and wounding several. In a second attack, militants detonate a bomb when an armored vehicle passed, wounding four. 
Militants attempt to carry out a suicide mission targeting tourists at the Karnak temple in Luxor. Police stop the vehicle carry three suicide bombers, one detonates his vest killing himself instantly. Police kill one attacker and wound the third. No civilians or police were killed, though several injured. 
A roadside bomb kills one police officer. Egyptian affiliate of IS is suspected.
Dozens of women gather outside the presidential palace challenging a law that restricts protests and calling for the release of thousands of prisoners. 
Militants detonate a remote car bomb targeting a top prosecutor in retaliation against the judiciary's crackdown on islamists, killing the prosecutor. 
Suspected militants are killed when the bombs they were transporting accidentally detonated. 
Suspected militants shoot and kill a police officer outside a Cairo museum. 
Sinai Province of IS launched major attacks against the army, killing approximately 70 soldiers and civilians. The government used F-16s in the region to stop the attacks, approximately 38 militants were killed. 
Army launches an attack against the IS affiliated militants in the Sinai peninsula after they attacks military bases in the region.
unknown gunmen on a motorcycle shoots and kills a police officer.
IS claims car bombing attack on Italian consulate that kills 1. 
Pro-Morsi protesters hold small marches in Cairo and Alexandria on Eid-al-fatr. Six people are killed during clashes with police after protesters attack police.
Pro-Morsi protesters hold small marches in Cairo and Alexandria on Eid-al-fatr. Six people are killed during clashes with police after protesters attack police.
Families of the passengers and victims of a boat crash in the Nile block the main road in the Warraq district. Security forces disperse the protest, no causalities. 
In a raid against two suspected jihadist bombers of the Italian consulate, two people are killed. 
Police officer is killed guarding Nigerian consulate.
Policeman shot and killed by unknown gunmen during a transport of prisoners.
Thousands of public workers organize and protest new law seeking to reform civil service.
IS kill Croatian prisoner it accused of colluding with the army. 
Military plane crashes in the southwest part of Egypt near the border with Libya while on a counter terrorism mission. Four soldiers were killed.
Unknown militants detonate a car bomb that wounds six police officers. 
Unknown militants detonate a roadside bomb targeting a police bus carrying conscript to Beheira, killing three. 
Egypt conducts an air strike against  terrorists but kills an envoy of tourists from Cairo, many of whom were from foreign nationals.  
Unknown militants detonate a bomb wounding two civilians. 
Army targets and kills 10 militants near the Bahariya Oasis.
Police report that they killed 9 terrorists in Cairo that were planning an attack to coincide with Eid al-Adha. 
Militants target and kill a pro-army tribal leader from the Sinai region outside his Cairo home.
Smugglers kill a police officer after he attempts to foil their smuggling. 
Unknown militants place and detonate three homemade bombs throughout Alexandria, no fatalities reported. 
Unknown militants place a roadside bomb that detonated as the victims passed by on the road. 
IS militants attack a checkpoint kidnapping three pro-government tribal fighters and wounding two soldiers. 
IS planted a bomb at a Cairo intersection four people were wounded and no fatalities reported. 
Three police officers were killed when their convoy passed over a road side bomb.
Gunmen shot the islamist candidate in the Egyptian parliamentary elections.
Soldiers kill three militants hiding out in the Ismailiya province.
IS downs a Russian airliner killing all 224 passenger and crew on board. 
IS suicide bomber attacks a police club killing three officers and wounding 10 others.
Police kill Ashraf Ali Hassanein Gharabli in a gunfight in Cairo.
Gunmen open fire on a church near the Giza pyramids no fatalities reported.
Egyptian police targeting smugglers on the border with Israel kill 15 Sudanese migrants as they attempt to cross the border.
IS suicide car bomber kills seven at a resort in El-Arish.
Hundreds protest the death of a man while in police custody. Police use gunfire to disperse protest, one wounded. 
IS attack and kill four police officers near Giza. 
Unknown suspects target a Cairo night club with a fire bomb killing 16 people trapped inside. 
Unknown gunmen shoot a university dean outside his home. Motive is unclear.
Unknown militants detonate a bomb in Giza killing three including a senior judge and wounding 11. 
Police open fire on a mentally unstable man attempting to cross the border. Palestinian officials attempt to signal to hold their fire.
Shell fired by IS militants kills an entire family in their home.