11

                                      DNA

                          September 12, 2013 Thursday

Are UP communal riots result of vote bank politics?;
Intelligence agencies have indicated that there is a predetermined political
design behind the recent communal riots in Muzaffarnagar. They have also warned
that such communal riots can also take place in Rajasthan, Bihar, Madhya
Pradesh, Karnataka and...

BYLINE: Rajesh Rao & Sanchari Ghosh

LENGTH: 950  words


It's a trend to take an emotional issue and flare it up for political gains

Communal riots or any riots, do not erupt on its own, it is instigated by people
themselves. Especially, with communal riots there is always a prior planning. As
communal riots have taken an ugly turn in the last few days, with people losing
their lives, there is no doubt that it has been instigated as a predetermined
political design looking at the upcoming 2014 general elections. It has always
been a trend to take an emotional issue and flare it up for political gains. For
example, in Sangli, Maharashtra, a temporary riot was instigated during last
Vidhan Sabha elections. Whether riots are there or not, the government's job is
to stop it from spreading further, but (Uttar Pradesh) UP government is unable
to do so. There is a political design behind every riot, that is why there is no
political will to pass the pending Prevention of Communal Riots Bill. The
communal riots in Muzaffarnagar did not take place overnight. There is always a
clue in the air before such tension starts, so why doesn't the government take
any prior measure to prevent them.

Anwar Rajan, senior member, Yuvak Kranti Dal

Riots become uglier, when leaders start making an issue out of it

It is very painful to see that humans are killing humans during riots. On
humanitarian grounds at least, we should not get down to such inhuman behaviour,
where we kill our own clan.

Communal riots become uglier, when politicians start making an issue out of it
for political gains. If the administration had been active, the recent riots in
UP would have never gone out of control. There is some leniency factor in the
recent communal riots. The government should have taken strict action against
the culprits, whether they are from Muslim or Hindu community. CM Akhilesh Yadav
should send a stern message to the conspirators of riots.

Azhar Ali Warsi, member, state advisory council, Jamaat-e-Islami

Political parties blame each other without finding a solution

What is happening in UP is clearly failure of the system. The bureaucracy is
demoralised and nobody wants to take a decision or action. They have only
transferred two officers, which is not going to rectify the problem. What we
need is to promote peace committees and use media to keep people away from
untoward instigations. There is no doubt that the spread of communal riots is
the result of vote bank politics. The political parties are blaming each other,
with no short-term or long-term solutions to curb the riots. UP government has
said that it has rounded up over 1000 people for rioting. However, just rounding
up people randomly is not going to resolve the issue. If the intelligence
agencies have given inputs that such riots can also happen in Rajasthan, Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka and even Haryana, then the inputs need to be taken
seriously.

Madhav Godbole, former union home secretary

UP politicians are now relying on politics of religion

The last political event in UP was the suspension of IAS officer Durga Shakti
Nagpal, who was targeted by the state government allegedly because action taken
by her caused religious tension. The party in power attempted to correct her but
the political intention was clear in its action. UP politicians are relying on
politics of religion ahead of coming election. Today it is not difficult for the
administration to control riots, if they intend to. Calling the army to control
riots, shows that State is either incompetent to control rioters, or it is
deliberately turning a blind eye, keeping in mind the upcoming election. CM
declared to distribute laptops to youth before the election, the politics of
religion for vote is diametrically opposite to the promise he has made.

Vanisree Ramanathan, faculty, Political Science

Communal riots are taking place in a systematic manner

The recent spate of riots in UP and polarisation occurring on religious grounds
has gathered great attention ahead of Lok Sabha polls. While Samajwadi Party led
state government and other political parties INC, BJP, BSP blame each other for
the bloody conflict and the loss of lives, the larger point which is being
missed is that the communal riots have been occurring in certain parts of India
in a systematic manner since independence.

It has flourished as an institution and gets activated, as noted by the eminent
scholar Paul Brass, during periods of political mobilisation or during the time
of elections. Hence riots are far from being spontaneous and they are produced
in a theatrical style in terms of involvement of volunteers and adoption of
certain strategies.

Ever since the ascendency of Ajit Singh, his party, the Lok Dal has had a
tumultuous journey with frequent shuffling of political partners and seeking
alliances that would keep it buoyant in the murky politics of caste/clan and
religion.

While the Lok Dal's political formulation has largely shrunk in the present
scenario, it is yet to be seen if it is able to maintain its foothold, this time
when the Jats and Muslims have emerged as the main participants in the ongoing
conflict.

Containing communal conflagration depends on the political will of state
governments, so that their respective regions don't get inflamed. But the larger
question remains that the complicity of the state or political parties in
communal conflicts strips them of their neutrality and legitimacy, resulting in
various groups settling their disputes by extra-constitutional means.

Hence the development of a sustained culture of negotiation, tolerance and
accommodation is the need of the hour to address communalisation and
militarisation of society.

Radhakrishnan, political analyst

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2013
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH
PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper
