Cuba Citizens demonstrated against U.S. plans for television station to beam programming into Cuba, Castro delivered speech at rally.
Cuba 7 citizens killed 3 agents while attempting to flee the island.
Cuba Asylum-seekers sought refuge in Czechoslovak, Spanish, Swiss & Italian embassies. 7 Cubans took hostages at Czechoslovak embassy. One arrested at Spanish embassy.
Costa Rica American minors at a juvenile corrective school rebel against the institution.
Guatemala An angry mob beats to death an accused robber and murderer.
Guatemala An angry mob burns to death a suspected robber.
Cuba Border patrol fired on private U.S. boat picking up refugees, killing 3 Cubans.
Cuba Cojimar residents hurled stones and shouted anti-government slogans to protest shooting of refugees.
Cuba Security forces fired on tractor towing a boat hiding citizens attempting to leave Cuba, 1 killed.
Cuba Demonstrations against government broke out at funeral of citizen killed escaping Cuba and the following day.
Guatemala A mob kills a man in an incident of vigilante violence.
Guatemala A crowd of 200 villagers burn to death 8 men accused of running drugs and guns.
Cuba Demonstrators rioted, clashed with government supporters after boat hijackings by people attempting to flee, stores and hotels attacked, policeman killed.
Cuba Citizens hijacked a navy boat to flee to U.S., 4 sailors forced off boat and 1 killed in process.
Guatemala Villagers take hostage 3 men accused of stealing a car.
Cuba Hunger strikers camped outside U.S. government offices in attempt to get permission to emigrate.
Guatemala A mob of villagers burn two men accused of stealing cattle.  One of the victims dies.
Cuba Citizens demonstrated in support of Castro and to protest U.S. trade embargo.
Cuba Demonstrators protested U.S. sanctions and proclaimed they would only strengthen Cuban resolve.
Cuba Citizens took part in May Day march to protest U.S. Helms-Burton Act that undercuts foreign investment in Cuba.
Cuba Armed citizens demonstrated and blocked access to Spanish Embassy over worsening relations between Spain and Cuba.
Cuba Members of human rights group on hunger strike to protest prosecution of one of party's leaders.
Cuba Citizens marched in May Day rally, also denounced U.S. economic embargo.
Cuba Dissidents protested at sentencing of fellow dissident Reinaldo Alfaro Garcia for providing false information critical of Cuba.
Cuba Japanese activists protested the U.S. embargo against Cuba.
Guatemala A mob burns alive two men accused of murder.
Cuba About 40 members of the Cuban exile group The Democracy Movement protested on the edge of Cuban water; they held a prayer ceremony for Cuban political prisoners and dropped flowers before turning around.
Cuba Protesters yelled 'Down with the government'' and ''Down with Castro'' outside a court where another dissident was being sentenced.
Panama Hundreds gather to celebrate as two defendants are found innocent of killing a US soldier in 1992.
Cuba About a dozen dissidents protested the trial of an independent journalist.
Cuba A protester shouting human rights slogans was attacked by Communist Party activists.
Mexico Three women beat to death an accused rapist they captured.
Cuba About 25 Cuban dissidents of various groups staged a 40-day hunger strike to demand freedom of expression and the release of prisoners.
Mexico A mob of 10 to 15 people forms to lynch two accused rapists; police move in and rescue the accused.
Guatemala A mob of 200 angry villagers pulls three suspected rapists from a police convoy and stones them to death while the police officers flee for their lives.
Cuba 14 opponents of Castro's government marched to draw attention to Cuba's political prisoners, as well as their demands for rights such as freedom of expression, assembly and association.
Guatemala An enraged mob beats to death an accused robber.
Guatemala A mob beats a man to death after he tried to hold up a vendor in a market.
Guatemala A mob murders two suspected robbers.
Guatemala A mob burns to death 4 suspected robbers.
Cuba A pilot dropped 50,000 anti-communism pamphlets on Havana; the pamphlets called on Cubans to launch a general strike against the communist government and to seize radio and television stations.
Mexico A mob of enraged villagers drags a man from his jail cell and hangs him after he was caught with a stolen pig and burro.
Mexico More than 100 residents of an isolated Indian town beat six people accused of witchcraft.
Guatemala Hundreds of villagers burn one man accused of witchcraft and hold hostage municipal officials accused of the same.
Haiti Marie Auxiliaries Decossa, an activist with a small business association, was killed by a group of five armed men, two of them in army uniforms.
Mexico Flight attendants strike against the national airline over working conditions, benefits, and salaries.
Mexico The 1500 member airline stewards union, ASSA, strikes to demand a salary increase.
Mexico Thousands of Mexican cyclists ride naked through the streets to protest aggressive drives and carbon emissions from cars.
Mexico 300 Mexican environmentalists and farm activists protest outside a meeting of agricultural researchers to decry the importation of genetically modified corn.
Haiti Aid truck was attacked by people who squeezed inside and threw packets of water into the crowd; 500 people crowded a food distribution site and people tried to push through an iron gate and UN troops fired grenades.
Guatemala Kidnappers abduct American evangelical aid workers.  A fire fight with police occurs, and several hostages are rescued.
Haiti Two masked men on a motorcycle gun down an aide to the prime minister.
Jamaica 38 flight attendants went on strike to protest company's lack of a viable business plan.
Jamaica 38 flight attendants went on strike to protest company's lack of a viable business plan.
Cuba A Cuban Airlines AN-24 was hijacked on a flight from the Isle of Youth to Havana by a man claiming to have two grenades and demanding to go to Florida.
Cuba Fugitive army soldiers tried to hijack a plane bound for the United States on and killed a military officer they took hostage; the hijacking attempt failed and the two fugitive soldiers were arrested.
Trinidad and Tobago 200 people lit candles, sang hymns and marched through a park to protest Alcoa Inc.'s proposed US$1.5 billion aluminum smelter, saying it will harm the environment and its neighbors.
Trinidad and Tobago A camp of up to 50 people kept a vigil, fearing the construction of an aluminum smelter will damage the environment and endanger residents who mainly work in farming or fishing.
Haiti A mob of several hundred stormed a police station, and after a gunman in the mob killed a suspected murderer, the mob burned his corpse.
Cuba Police prevented a group of people going to a house where a human rights organization meeting was going to take place; the activists layed down in the street to protest and twelve were arrested.
Cuba A pro-government protest was held.
Jamaica 3 of Jamaica's 4 foreign-owned alumina refineries went on strike demanding higher wages and fringe benefits.
Mexico Gunmen attack an ambulance, killing a patient who had narrowly survived an earlier shooting.
Cuba Scores of residents staged a protest when police arrived to evict a family that had built a home on a vacant lot without the government's permission.
Guatemala Bandits attack a bus full of American students from St. Mary's College and commit several rapes.
Cuba About 20 members of the Party for Human Rights in Cuba gathered in a small apartment for a 12-hour symbolic fast to demonstrate their support for a UN resolution on human rights.
Honduras An American living in Honduras is kidnapped; a ransom demand is made.
Cuba About 10 to 15 mothers and relatives of dissidents, dressed all in white, held a public protest over 3 days seeking the release of one of 75 dissidents; on the third day, the protesters were handed warning letters.
Cuba The Ladies in White marched to the headquarters of the government's journalists' union to demand their plight be publicized in Cuba's media.
Cuba Scores of neighbors broke up a protest by a dissident physician, striking him with sticks and ripping down posters of prisoners' photographs he had placed on the side of his house.
Guatemala Unknown parties attempt to kidnap an American human rights investigator.
Cuba 30 women dressed in white marched peacefully to demand the release of their husbands.
Cuba 20 protesters held a public memorial for the deaths on July 13, 1994 of 41 people as they tried to flee to the United States; dozens of Castro activists staged a counter-protest and 30 people were arrested.
Cuba About 15 people protested to demand the release of political prisoners from Cuban jails and also against the normalization of relations between France and Cuba; between twenty and thirty political activists were arrested.
Honduras Fired miners blockade a road into the American Pacific mining company.  Army troops try to remove the protesters, resulting in clashes and one civilian death.
Panama Members of the leftist group M-20 throw a grenade into a discotheque, wounding 16 American soldiers, 11 Panamanians, and killing 1 American.  
Haiti Two Americans were injured when a group of five men threw rocks at them and shot at their car.
Cuba The Ladies in White marched to demand the release of their imprisoned husbands.
Cuba The Ladies in White marched to demand the release of their imprisoned husbands.
Cuba Less than a dozen political dissidents marched to mark International Human Rights Day and were interrupted by dozens of government supporters who surrounded the protesters and pushed and shoved them.
Haiti About 2 dozen supporters of Jean-Claude Duvalier disrupted a news conference about abuses during his rule, shouting down representatives of Amnesty International.
Cuba The Ladies in White held a march to demand the release of political prisoners.
Cuba An anti-government demonstration was held and police briefly detained seven of the anti-government protesters.
Cuba Some 25 dissidents dressed in black marched to a church to protest the arrest of a government opponent and Cuban security forces detained between 15 and 20 of the protesters after storming into a church's parish hall.
Cuba About 45 protesters, the wives of jailed dissidents and spaniards, staged a demonstration.
Cuba A dozen dissidents staged a protest, and government supporters mobbed and pushed around a handful of protesters, breaking up the protest and two journalists were also injured by the counter-protesters and arrests were made.
Cuba 10 wives of imprisoned political dissidents protested calling for the release of their husbands and the protest was disrupted by uniformed police who forced the protesters onto buses and took them home.
Mexico Four attackers exchange gunshots with the top anti-drug prosecutor.
Cuba About 30 members of the Ladies in White held a group prayer to mark the sixth anniversary of a crackdown on dissidents. 
Cuba Six dissidents staged a 40-day sit in protest against state security agents who stole a camera from a dissident.
Mexico About 100 student supporters of a recently ended student strike march through campus and clash with anti-strike students.
Cuba More than 30 dissidents protested in support of imprisoned dissident Orlando Zapata and police arrested 35 of them.
Cuba An anti-government protest was held.
Cuba The Ladies in White staged a protest to bring attention to the eight-year anniversary of the government's crackdown on dissent; one anti-government protester was arrested and the protesters clashed with pro-government demonstrators.
Cuba Members of the Ladies in White protesting for imprisoned political dissidents were stopped by police and other security agents and were forced onto a bus and driven home.
Cuba The Ladies in White staged a demonstration against the imprisonment of political dissidents.
Cuba The Ladies in White held a march to call for the release of imprisoned dissidents.
Cuba A protest was held at the University of Havana and 3 protesters were arrested.
Cuba About 30 members of the Ladies in White marched, demanding the government honor an agreement to release their loved ones by the end of the day.
Haiti Protests were held as OAS delegates were in a meeting with Haiti's lawmakers; over subsequent days, protests continue.
Haiti About 150 anti-Aristide militants demonstrated twice in front of Parliament, demanding that Aristide be tried for high treason.
Haiti About 200 anti-Aristide people, many soldiers in plain clothes, chanted outside army headquarters after army commander Cedras returned from New York after signing an agreement with Aristide.
Haiti A demonstration against Aristide was held.
Haiti A protest was held against Aristide and the United Nations.
Cuba A dissident shouted anti-government slogans and was detained by police; after his arrest, a bus stopped outside the home and about 40 people got out and chanted pro-government slogans
Haiti About 200 rightists marched to demand the replacement of Aristide.
Cuba Five people held a protest against restrictions on the rights of its citizens to travel overseas and return and were arrested by police.
Cuba The Ladies in White dissident group staged a protest and two dozen people by detained by police.
Haiti A pro-military government protest was held against Aristide and the U.S. 
Haiti Gunmen occupied an orphanage run by former President Aristide, demanding jobs and accusing Aristide of making money off their misfortune; about 40 protesters supporting the gunmen also entered the orphanage.
Cuba More than 100 members of the Ladies in White dissident group as well as their supporters held a march in memory of group founder Laura Pollan.
Haiti Opposition supporters demonstrated, demanding that Aristide and his followers be put on trial; towards the end of the protest, Aristide supporters began firing on the protesters, killing at least 6 people.
Cuba 13 members of the Republican Party of Cuba dissident group occupied a Catholic church, demanding that Pope Benedict XVI press for political freedom in Cuba; protester demands include unconditional freedom for political prisoners.
Cuba A protest by about 20 members of the Ladies in White dissident group was broken up by police who arrested them.
Haiti Protesters demanded the resignations of Aristide and Malval if the U.N. plan is not implemented by Oct. 30.
Cuba About 30 members of the Ladies in White dissident group staged a march demanding the release of political prisoners.
Cuba Prior to Pope Benedict's XVI's mass, a man shouted slogans against the Communist government was hit by a first aid worker and security agents moved in and took the protester away.
Cuba Several dozen members of the Ladies in White dissident group and other dissidents were marching to demand the release of a political prisoner and were arrested by police.
Cuba Dissidents held organized protests against the treatment of political opponents.
Cuba The Ladies in White held a protest outside a church.
Cuba The arrest of a dissident led a group of at least 16 dissidents to gather at a police station to demand information about her case; the dissidents were detained and released a few hours later.
Cuba About 100 members of the Ladies in White dissident group were detained and beaten as they held a march bringing attention to human rights abuses in Cuba.
Cuba Ladies in White were protesting the central government for imprisoning dissidents and were met by pro-government protesters on Human Rights Day. 
Cuba Protestor was trying to get close to Pope Francis to complain about the Communist regime. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Thousands of students and other citizens protest nationwide the regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril and the killing of an 11-year old girl during a protest on March 5; cars and tires set on fire and several citizens killed in police clashes. 
Haiti Police looking for the assailant of an army major killed the day before threw a man against a pickup truck, shot him four times at point-blank range in the stomach, buttocks and elbow.
Haiti At least 10 peasants were wounded Monday in the north coast town of Borgne during a demonstration in favor of the Pascal-Trouillot government.
Haiti A pro-government protest was held.
Haiti About 1,000 Aristide supporters held a demonstration.
Haiti Aristide supporters held a pro-government protest.
Haiti An anti-government protest of about 200 people turned violent when Aristide protesters and opponents threw rocks and police fired tear gas.
Haiti Pro-Aristide demonstration of 1,000 people led to clashes with over 4,000 anti-government protesters who threw rocks and bottles at each other and more than a dozen people were injured and police fired tear gas.
Haiti Slum neighborhood committees marched through the slums and some shattered car windows, demanding that President Trouillot resign.
Haiti About 1,000 Aristide supporters held a demonstration.
Haiti Aristide supporters held a pro-government protest.
Haiti Hundreds marched in front of the National Palace, and thousands of demonstrators angry over high food prices ransacked businesses and warehouses in Cap Haitien.
Haiti Hundreds marched in front of the National Palace, and thousands of demonstrators angry over high food prices ransacked businesses and warehouses in Cap Haitien.
Haiti Thousands of Aristide supporters held a demonstration.
Haiti Several thousand Aristide supporters held a demonstration in front of the National Palace.
Haiti About 100 members of the Front of United Militants painted anti-U.S. slogans on the outer wall of the U.S. embassy and lighted a pile of tires in front of the gate after accusing U.S. Ambassador Adams of meddling in Haitian affairs.
Haiti More than 1,000 protesters called for the ouster of foreign minister Marie-Denise Jean-Louis because they felt she had not done enough to protect Haitians working in the Dominican Republic.
Haiti Several dissidents, including four priests, were arrested in Gonaives, where more than 5,000 people participated in a pro-Aristide demonstration.
Haiti More than 1,000 Aristide supporters demonstrated in front of the National Palace, and occupants of a van opened fire on the crowd, killing two people and injuring six.
Haiti About 50 youths protested to show their support for an Organization of American States economic and diplomatic embargo.
Haiti Thousands of Aristide supporters held a demonstration.
Haiti Clashes between supporters and opponents of Aristide.
Haiti An Aristide partisan was beaten and hacked to death by 10 men, including a soldier, two special police agents, and two members of the far-right paramilitary group the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti.
Haiti Gunmen broke into Lavalas Family party coordinator Cleonord Souverain when he was not home and shot and killed six of his relatives.
Haiti An Aristide supporter was dragged out of a church service by armed guards and shot dead; two other people were also killed in the violence; armed thugs also beat Aristide sympathizers outside of the church.
Haiti More than 2,000 people participated in a pro-Aristide demonstration; the protest started at a funeral service for an Aristide supporter reportedly beaten to death by soldiers.
Haiti A demonstration calling for elections was held.
Haiti A protest mass celebrated by pro-Aristide priests attracted a crowd of about 100 people.
Haiti Six armed men abducted an Aristide supporter, covered him in gasoline and set him on fire because he did not belong to the same political party as the attackers.
Haiti Heavily armed soldiers and police searched homes and cars and ran identity checks on pedestrians.
Haiti About 250 students and professors at a teachers' school banged on their desks and chanted anti-Bazin slogans; police ringed the school to stop the demonstrators from leaving the school.
Haiti Soldiers exchanged gunfire with about 15 armed gunmen and one soldier was wounded near a training site for members of an anti-government group. 
Haiti A grenade attack on Aristide and Mayor Evans Paul supporters killed between 4 and 9 people and wounded at least 62 people; demonstrators surrounded the house where the grenades were suspected of coming from and hurled bricks at the building.
Haiti Hundreds of people rallied outside the National Palace in support of President Aristide.
Mexico Five hundred demonstrators block bridges between Mexico and the US to protest the presence of Mexico's armed forces in the area.
Haiti A funeral mass turned into a political rally demanding the return of Aristide; police broke up the protest and a few people were arrested and beaten; after the Mass, a fistfight broke out between supporters and opponents. 
Haiti Police broke up a demonstration by hundreds of pro-Aristide protesters who torched tires in the streets.
Haiti Churchgoers held a protest and at least ten people were arrested, one woman was shot and an activist was beaten.
Haiti Police dispersed 200 pro-Aristide demonstrators.
Haiti Aristide supporters demonstrated at the site of a 1988 massacre; police beat and arrested some of the demonstrators.
Haiti Several hundred young Aristide supporters demonstrated; police tried to break up the protests but the demonstrators kept moving to different locations around Gonaives; a man accused of being a police informer was beaten by protesters.
Haiti One photograph-carrying Aristide supporter was killed and ten others were wounded.
Haiti Pro-Aristide businessman Antoine Izmery helped organize a protest to mark the one-year anniversary of the arrests of three pro-Aristide demonstrators; leaflets were distributed of Aristide; five demonstrators arrested.
Haiti An Aristide supporter put up photographs of Aristide and was arrested and severly beaten.
Nicaragua Army forces skirmish with rearmed guerrillas.
Mexico Gangs of gunmen stage seven separate attacks on the army, including the blockading of three army bases.  The attacks touch off firefights that leave many dead.
Mexico Gangs of gunmen stage seven separate attacks on the army, including the blockading of three army bases.  The attacks touch off firefights that leave many dead.
Mexico Gangs of gunmen stage seven separate attacks on the army, including the blockading of three army bases.  The attacks touch off firefights that leave many dead.
Haiti About 50 people, including members of the paramilitary group Macoutes, took part in an exhibition in support of former dictator Duvalier.
Mexico Gunmen assassinate an army general who had been appointed police chief of a northern Mexican town.
Haiti Attackers attacked an army outpost. 
Guatemala A mob seizes control of an army outpost in protestover the construction of a hydroelectric plant.  The mob also demands justice for a man killed hours earlier for what they claim was an attempt to intimidate them.
Mexico Gunmen ambush an army patrol.
Guatemala Military police mutiny for an improved compensation package for post-war demobilization.  They claim that the rebels got a better deal and then refuse to leave their barracks, exchanging gunfire with government troops.
Haiti About 30 protesters opposed to Aristide demonstrated to demand suspension of the constitution and dissolution of Parliament and Aristide's presidency.
Honduras Belgium's honorary consul to Honduras is shot dead.
Haiti Thousands of right-wing protesters demanded the dissolution of the parliament and the appointment of a civilian committee to end the political crisis.
Mexico Members of the Mexican Navy marines killed 8 suspected cartel members qafter a two hour gunbattle.
Haiti Attackers fired bullets and tear gas at the house holding pro-democracy group members; armed soldiers are reported to have joined in on the raid.
Dominican Republic Gunman shot and killed Cohen, apparent motive was robbery.
Cuba Nine citizens broke into Belgian ambassador residence seeking asylum.
Cuba Citizens invaded residence of Belgian ambassador in effort to win asylum, held protest appealing for help.
Mexico Villagers who say they suffered from psychological and property damage from detonations unleashed by a Chinese petroleum exploration company hold 50 workers hostage to demand compensation.
Cuba Secret police agents abducted and beat blogger Yoani Sanchez on her way to a protest.
Cuba A Cuban government-owned pilot boat was hijacked with 10-15 people aboard.
Mexico A teenager stages a hunger strike outside the British embassy to demand an invitation to the upcoming royal wedding.  She eventually wins an invitation.
Haiti Several thousand people demonstrated to show Aristide, urged that military coup leader Lt. Gen. Raoul Cedras be imprisoned and hailed Americans; police moved in clubbing several demonstrators with sticks and the gun butts. 
Haiti A demonstration of thousands of Aristide supporters was broken up by police; one man was beaten to death by police; after this man was killed, demonstrators began throwing rocks and pieces of concrete at police, and one policemen was injured. 
Haiti A demonstration supporting Aristide was held.
Haiti A pro-Aristide demonstration was held.
Haiti About 100 demonstrators threw rocks at police headquarters, a former torture site.
Haiti What are thought to be members of the National Congress of Democratic Movements firebombed the building housing election ballots, and 25-36 members were arrested. 
Haiti A group of armed men hijacked a bus carrying 11 off-duty peacekeepers and beat them before letting them go.
Haiti Pro-Aristide demonstrators held a protest. 
Haiti Hundreds of pro-U.S. demonstrators surrounded the police precinct headquarters.
Haiti Hundreds of pro-U.S. demonstrators thronged outside Haitian army headquarters where military leader Lt. Gen. Cedras met for two hours with U.S. Ambassador William Swing and Lt. Gen. Hugh Shelton.
Haiti About half a dozen pro-military attaches hacked a bus driver to death.
Haiti A pro-Aristide demonstration of about 200 people turned violent when members of the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti threw rocks at demonstrators and hit some with batons.
Haiti A march of 5,000 pro-democracy demonstrators was broken up by pro-Army militiamen, who tore apart a loudspeaker truck at the front of the pro-Aristide march, shooting out its tires and pouring gasoline around it.
Haiti A pro-democracy demonstration with thousands of people was held.
Haiti Churchgoers held a protest against the government.
Guatemala Bus passengers try to fight off four gang members during an attempted robbery.  One passenger and one assailant is killed.
Haiti Aristide supporters protested against the military.
Haiti About 5,000 pro-democracy Haitians marched to army headquarters demanding that Cedras step down and also leave Haiti.
Haiti Several thousand people demonstrated in support of Aristide; a paramilitary member threw a rock at demonstrators, who then seized him, beat him, and turned him over to U.S. forces.
Haiti A police force trainee swearing in was broken up by about 500 people who accused the inductees of being linked to the military and forced them to flee.
Honduras Protesters decry the official beginning of the CAFTA pact.
Haiti Branor Sanon, a campaign organizer, was killed by three unidentified armed individuals as he was waiting for a taxi.
Honduras 20 people protest at the Canadian embassy over that country's asylum policies.
Haiti Members of the Haitian Women's Solidarity association demonstrated to protest rapes and other violence they experienced during Haiti's three-year period of military rule.
Haiti Hundreds of discharged soldiers massed at army headquarters demanding their salary for December and payment of pensions.
Haiti Discharged soldiers rioted then protested against the military.
Haiti About 1,500 protesters marched around the Presidential Palace, demanding that Haiti's army be disbanded; scores of demonstrators later broke into the Ministry of Commerce.
Haiti 15 National Radio reporters stopped airing the news and held a sit-in, demanding democratic reform of their state-run newsroom.
Haiti Hundreds of demonstrators threatened to torch food warehouses unless the cost of living was lowered and demanded that bureaucrats loyal to past military-backed governments be removed from office.
Haiti About 1,000 demonstrators took to the streets to protest the high cost of living and inadequate public safety.
Mexico Assailants burst into the Casino Royal, douse the place with gas, and start a fire.  Police eventually arrest alleged members of the Zeta cartel.
Haiti 200 people staged a peaceful protest march because their names weren't on the voters' list.
Haiti Cpl. Norelus arrested and beat a Catholic priest.
Haiti Pro-Aristide demonstrators protested against Cedras. 
Haiti Demonsrators protesting against Cedras were tear-gassed by police and the police then dragged at least two demonstrators inside a building.
El Salvador Former paramilitaries storm the Central Bank, demanding compensation for their participation in the war.  Police use gas and rubber bullets.
Haiti 13 far-left political and grass-roots organizations staged a protest against foreign troops in Haiti and plans to sell state-owned companies.
Haiti Students demanding back pay for teachers and more spending on public schools threw rocks at peacekeepers and Haitian police who prevented the students from closing a private school.
Panama 290 workers strike to demand increased compensation when their plant closes at the end of the year.
Mexico Cattlemen march in protest and also seize leader of Mexico's Southeastern Human Rights Association, accusing them of encouraging peasants to stage land invasions.
Haiti The chief of security for former President Aristide's foundation and shot and killed while riding on a bus.
Mexico Citizens Front for the Defense of San Cristobal staged a demonstration. 
Costa Rica Banana workers strike to protest new fruit quality standards that deprive them of pay bonuses.
Honduras Banana workers strike for better wages.
Honduras Banana workers strike to demand wage hikes and more social services.
Haiti Several policemen protesting unfair promotion selection criteria interrupted an examination for precinct chiefs.
Haiti 600 people protested against the government's plan to privatize state-owned businesses and against the World Bank.
Haiti Several dozen demobilized soldiers demonstrated to demand back payment and pensions.
Honduras A faction of the communist Cinchoneros attempt an assassination against one of their group leaders that made peace with the military and announced incorporation into the political system.
Haiti About 20 gunmen in the olive uniform of the former army attacked police headquarters and may have sprayed the legislative palace with gunfire, with one killed.
Haiti More than 500 slum dwellers demonstrated against the upsurge in violence.
Haiti Street cleaners, angry over not being paid, blocked access to the municipal cemetery, smeared excrement on the door of the Finance Ministry and dumped a coffin full of garbage in the ministry's courtyard.
Haiti About 50 state university hospital nurses and orderlies staged a walk-out to demand eight months' back pay.
Haiti About 750 Port-Au-Prince public employees shut down City Hall and went on strike to demand back pay owed by the federal government.
Haiti About 300 demonstrators burned down a courthouse, threw rocks at and tried to set fire to a police station after a police officer shot and killed a suspected criminal.
Haiti Haiti's 14 Provincial district attorneys demanding back pay and salary increases staged a three-day strike.
Haiti Public school teachers staged a five-day strike to demand additional training, higher salaries and other reforms in the educational system.
Haiti 1,000 Aristide supporters pelted civil leaders and journalists with rocks and also lobbed stones at the cars of US, French and Organization of American States diplomats.
Haiti 500 lawyers in Port-Au-Prince staged a strike to protest the murder of a fellow lawyer.
Haiti About 100 protested against Premier Smarth.
Haiti Several were injured in protests in which students demanding better school conditions and militants protesting the government's economic policies smashed car windows.
Mexico Gunmen shoot and kill three coffee growers.  Police surprise the gunmen and shoot down five of them.  Motive is unknown.
Guatemala Hundreds of peasants throughout northern Guatemala seize 14 coffee plantations to protest the unfair distribution of land.
Haiti Hundreds of people built barricades of burning tires to protest delays in recovering dozens of bodies from a ferry boat wreck.
Haiti The 11-member newsroom staff of Radio Vision 2000 walked off the job and refused to resume broadcasts until its safety is guaranteed.
Haiti Non-medical hospital workers staged a strike to demand a 300 percent wage increase.
Haiti A U.S. church group protested in front of the American Embassy, demanding the removal of 4,000 tons of allegedly toxic ash dumped in Haiti.
Haiti 400 students and teachers protested to demand the release of a former judge and teacher; activists infiltrated the protest and stoned the police, and police beat people and arrested several.
Haiti Hundreds of protesters demonstrated and threw rocks through car windshields, demanding that the president carry out a threat to dissolve Parliament.
Haiti Several thousand demonstrators marched in support of the president's decision to shut down parliament.
Haiti Several thousand demonstrators marched in support of the president's decision to shut down parliament.
Haiti Several thousand demonstrators marched in support of the president's decision to shut down parliament.
Guatemala Indigenous peoples protest against Columbus Day.
Haiti Hundreds of street merchants burned vehicles to protest against a municipal decision to clear them off the streets and shouted ''Down with Jhonny Charles!'' the deputy mayor.
Haiti Thousands of people demonstrated to demand law and order, and the demonstration escalated when a group of activists threw stones and chairs at the podium.
Haiti About 30 pro-Aristide militants broke up a pro-election ceremony, spraying electoral officials with bottles of urine, knocking over chairs and shouting pro-Aristide slogans.
Haiti Six pro-Aristide militants verbally assaulted and then began punching Jean Limongy, the organizer of an outdoor political rally, and police arrested one person.
Haiti More than ten thousand  people demonstrated to protest the murder of two French citizens and a Haitian painter.
Mexico Protesters storm the lower house of Congress on horseback, and occupy the legislative chamber for more than an hour. Teachers at the National Coordination of Education Workers demand higher wages.
Mexico Thousands of PRD supporters led by Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador protest a Congressional vote stripping him of immunity from criminal prosecution.
Mexico Protesters gather and throw rocks at police to protest the passage of a pension reform bill.  Police respond with tear gas.
Mexico Abortion opponents summoned by Mexico's Catholic Church march through the capital to protest bills that would legalize abortion in the first three months of pregnancy.
Guatemala 300 unionists take over the Congress building to protest a law that would make it illegal for private sector employees to strike.
Haiti About 100 journalists marched to protest the slaying of radio commentator Jean Dominique, demanding that the government crack down on violence.
Trinidad and Tobago Protesting workers shut down a construction project at a natural gas plant; strike lasts approximately ten weeks; hundreds of these striking workers also staged a demonstration at Port-of-Spain, demanding higher wages.
Trinidad and Tobago Protesting workers shut down a construction project at a natural gas plant; strike lasts approximately ten weeks; hundreds of these striking workers also staged a demonstration at Port-of-Spain, demanding higher wages.
Jamaica Public transit workers blocked buses from serving routes to protest Conurban tranferring routes to government.
Mexico Dozens of residents protest and block streets around the site of a former cultural center where Costco plans to build a store.  Riot police arrive and arrest many of the protesters.
Haiti Opposition supporters protested alleged vote rigging, and police fired tear gas to disperse them; after the police left, hundreds of Aristide militants chased the demonstrators with a storm of stones and one was killed.
Haiti Four gunmen, including two in army uniform, sprayed the Council of State with gunfire, leading to two deaths; it was believed this was meant to block the government from holding presidential balloting.
Mexico 20,000 people, many of them upper class, march to protest crime and police corruption.
Mexico Thousands of people march against a crime wave, which recently claimed the life of a popular television personality.
Mexico 30 upper-middle class protesters demonstrate against high crime rates.
Mexico More than 100 citizens march to protest the deaths of hundreds of women in the last decade, and the recent sexual abuse and slaying of a 7-year old girl.
Mexico About 2000 people march against the rising tide of violence in the city.
Mexico Thousands of white-clad demonstrators protest against a surge of drug-related violence in Cuidad Juarez.
Mexico Hundreds of thousands of people join marches in all 32 Mexican states to protest against the tide of killings, kidnappings, and shootouts around the country.  13 different anti-crime groups organize the protests.
Mexico More than 8000 people gather to protest a wave of violence that has afflicted the city in recent weeks.  They are led by the state's governor.
Mexico 500 women march to protest against the murder of female protestor outside a government office.
Haiti More than 1,000 people gathered on a soccer field to protest the election.
Mexico About 500 people stage a four day silent march to protest drug violence, marching from Cuernavaca to Mexico City.  They are joined by more protesters in Mexico City.
Haiti About a thousand people demonstrated to demand that the government scrap disputed election results.
Mexico About 500 people stage a four day silent march to protest drug violence, marching from Cuernavaca to Mexico City.  They are joined by more protesters in Mexico City.
Haiti About 5,000 protesters marched to demand the resignation of the legislature.
Haiti About 5,000 protesters marched to demand the resignation of the legislature.
Haiti About 1,000 people demonstrated, calling for the nullification of recent elections and the resignation of the government.
Cuba Two men hijacked border guard vessel to try to reach Florida.
Mexico A half dozen assailants wearing masks stop a bus and kidnap 33 Cuban migrants and 4 Central American migrants.
Haiti Five senators aligned with President Aristide staged a work stoppage in a move aimed at bringing political reconciliation.
Haiti Gunmen fired around the home of Culture Minister Jean-Claude Bajeux, a security guard at the house returned fire, chasing off at least two gunmen.
Haiti About 1,000 former soldiers marched demanding an end to Aristide's allegedly dictatorial power and in support of opposition leader Gerard Gourgue.
Jamaica 15 armed men shot and killed 4 victims in Golden Villas, stronghold of PNP in apparent retaliation for previous night's shooting.
Jamaica Walden hacked to death by crowd after he attacked two police officers with machete and knife.
Jamaica Prison guards staged a strike to protest poor working conditions under Prescod and renewal of his contract.
Haiti Riot police fired tear gas at more than 1,000 people protesting deputies seeking to oust Prime Minister Preval and shake up the Cabinet of President Aristide; piles of tires were ignited in the streets.
Haiti About 100 opposition partisans marched.
Haiti About 100 victims and relatives of the 1991 coup demonstrated to call for justice for the victims, trial of the guilty and the official dissolution of the army.
Haiti About 100 residents demonstrated to protest what they said was the inability of President Aristide's government to guarantee their safety.
Haiti Small Convergence-led demonstrations were held in Petit-Goave and Gonaives.
Haiti Small Convergence-led demonstrations were held in Petit-Goave and Gonaives.
Jamaica Graham was killed by three gunmen.
Mexico Student supporters of the PRD throw eggs at the PAN candidate.
Mexico A group of three drug-gang hitmen storm into a restaurant and execute the director of public safety and a bodyguard.
El Salvador Hundreds infected with HIV protest against discrimination.
Mexico Dozens of protesters stage a protest against discrimination aimed at people with tattoos and piercings.
Cuba A pro-American dissident blogger was arrested to prevent her from protesting at the trial of a man charged with killing a dissident in a car crash.
Haiti About 1,000 supporters of Haiti's opposition rallied at the ruins of their headquarters to proclaim their right to political freedom.
Cuba Security agents detained more than 100 dissidents across Cuba to prevent protests at the funeral of a leading political prisoner who died while on hunger strike.
Haiti Hundreds of people marched and chanted, demanding punishment for the Aristide supporters who hacked a journalist to death six months before.
Cuba Security agents detained more than 100 dissidents across Cuba to prevent protests at the funeral of a leading political prisoner who died while on hunger strike.
Haiti The Cannibal Army demonstrated against the government.
Haiti Thousands of anti-government protesters rioted.
Cuba Security agents detained more than 100 dissidents across Cuba to prevent protests at the funeral of a leading political prisoner who died while on hunger strike.
Haiti About 100 university students and their supporters marched to demand the immediate reinstatement of the administrative board.
Cuba Five dissidents were arrested for attending a political meeting at a private home.
Haiti More than 1,000 students demonstrated in front of the Parliament building to demand Parliament withdraw a bill clarifying the university's autonomy.
Haiti Thousands of students temporarily occupied the state university's administrative building, demanding that the government reinstate the university's dissolved board and the university's former rector.
Haiti The Citizens Initiative and other opposition groups protested against the government.
Haiti The Citizens Initiative and other opposition groups protested against the government.
Haiti Thousands marched to demand justice for slain journalist Brignol Lindor.
Haiti Thousands of protesters demonstrated against the high cost of living, increased school exam fees and against Aristide and forced their way into a police station courtyard and clashed with police.
Haiti Thousands of students protested demanding President Aristide's resignation and students disrupted a pro-government demonstration by throwing rocks.
Haiti Thousands of students protested demanding President Aristide's resignation and students disrupted a pro-government demonstration by throwing rocks.
Haiti Thousands of students protested demanding President Aristide's resignation and students disrupted a pro-government demonstration by throwing rocks.
Cuba Around 30 political dissidents were arrested over a period of three days after defying a police warning about gathering in public with other dissidents.
Haiti Protests were held against Aristide's government and against poor living conditions and clashes erupted between Aristide supporters and protesters.
Haiti Protests were held against Aristide's government and against poor living conditions and clashes erupted between Aristide supporters and protesters.
Haiti Protests were held against Aristide's government and against poor living conditions and clashes erupted between Aristide supporters and protesters.
Cuba Police detained around 20 dissidents to prevent them from taking part in a protest the next day to mark the anniversary of a hunger striker's death.
Haiti More than 1,000 Haitians demonstrated against President Aristide and gun-wielding Aristide supporters pelted the protesters with rocks and one person was shot.
Haiti 5,000 anti-government protesters were pelted with stones and beaten by more than 1,000 government supporters and a police officer was also shot.
Cuba Police detained around 20 dissidents to prevent them from taking part in a protest the next day to mark the anniversary of a hunger striker's death.
Haiti 3,000 people participated in a peaceful anti-government demonstration.
Haiti 3,000 people participated in a peaceful anti-government demonstration.
Haiti More than 1,000 people participated in an anti-government demonstration.
Haiti A few hundred people participated in an anti-government protest.
Cuba Two dissidents were detained by police as they were preparing for a march.
Haiti Thousands of anti-government protesters were broken up by police who fired tear gas, and Aristide supporters wielded whips and hurled rocks at protesters.
Haiti 2,000 anti-government marchers led to two men being shot by Aristide supporters and police fired tear gas; the protesters also called for justice in the death of journalist Brignol Lindor.
Haiti An anti-government march of about 2,000 people was broken up by police, who fired tear gas.
Haiti An anti-government protest of 500 people was broken up by police using batons.
Cuba Cuban authorities detained 30 dissidents to stop them from organizing a demonstration.
Cuba More than 30 dissidents were arrested or prevented from leaving their homes to prevent them from going to the funeral of a dissident who died during a hunger strike.
Cuba At least 70 dissidents were arrested to prevent from from protesting over a period of four days.
Cuba A dissident was beaten and arrested and when his wife went to the police station to get him out of prison she was also arrested; while in custody, tear gas was used.
Cuba Police arrested dissidents.
Haiti Opposition leaders and supporters held a protest.
Haiti Hundreds marched to protest the Aristide government and a dozen Aristide partisans opened fire on the protesters and threw urine-filled bottles and rocks and police fired tear gas.
Haiti An anti government protest was held.
Haiti Women of the Rising Sun held a demonstration of about 100 women to protest the economic conditions in Haiti and urge Aristide to step down early.
Haiti A women's rights activist and her husband were arrested and government prosecutor ordered the couple released, but police refused and the couple was held for five days. 
Haiti Aristide supporters held a demonstration.
Haiti 300 anti-government protesters outside the National Palace were beaten by police using nightsticks who also fired tear gas and journalists were also beaten.
Haiti Protesters marched peacefully from Radio Haiti Inter, the station slain reporter Jean Dominique owned, to a central square.
Haiti 150 demonstrators rioted, burned a makeshift dominican flag and tore down a sign at the Dominican embassy to protest the killing of a Haitian in the Dominican Republic.
Haiti Thousands of civil society group members and government opponents held a protest that was broken up by police who fired tear gas and also fired live rounds and rocks were thrown, injuring at least five police.
Haiti 100 anti-government activists demonstrated in front of the Organization of American States' offices, asking the hemispheric organization to refuse to recognize President Aristide's legitimacy.
Haiti 4,000 opposition members demonstrated against the government, and more than a dozen people were injured when police tried to disperse the protest and when protesters threw rocks and bottles at pro-government protesters.
Haiti Protesters called for Aristide to step down; police exchanged gunfire with some of the protesters and fired tear gas; over seven days of protest, one person was killed.
Dominican Republic Citizens demonstrated to protest increases in telephone costs and government austerity measures, police responded with tear gas and rubber bullets.
Haiti About 100 opposition supporters went into the streets to protest Aristide's government.
Haiti Gunmen stormed out of vehicles and assaulted and robbed drivers and pedestrians, at least 1 to 3 people killed.
Haiti More than a thousand mourners at a funeral for slain gang leader Amiot Metayer hurled rocks at police.
Haiti Anti-government protesters demonstrated and some protesters threw rocks at police and police fired tear gas to disperse the protesters.
Haiti Hundreds of anti-government protesters demonstrated to demand the ouster of Aristide and police and protesters exchanged gunfire, with one protester being shot in the head and a police officer shot.
Haiti A protest of 100 anti-government demonstrators was broken up by police using clubs; after police broke up the march, the protesters began marching again and a man threw rocks at the protesters who threw rocks back.
Haiti The Gonaives Resistance Front held an anti-government demonstration.
Haiti 100 Aristide supporters threw rocks and bottles at 20 opposition activists who were getting ready for a protest march and Aristide partisans pushed and shoved the opposition protesters.
Haiti 50 women's rights activists protested the deaths of two women allegedly shot and killed by police, and their demonstration was broken up by about 30 Aristide supporters who threw rocks.
Haiti Hundreds of Amiot Metayer supporters demonstrated, accusing Cite Soleil Mayor Fritz Joseph of having sent a rival to kill Wilson Lemaire.
Haiti University students and opposition activists held a protest against the government.
Haiti A planned opposition protest was broken up by 8,000 Aristide supporters, Aristide and opposition supporters began throwing rocks at each other and police fired tear gas and arrested 30.
Haiti Members of nine different civil groups occupied the conference room in the Organization of American State's main office, saying they won't leave until the organization intervenes and the government releases detained protesters.
Haiti About 100 students demanding that Aristide resign clashed with government supporters; rocks were thrown, and students ransacked two university buildings, injuring at least 14 people.
Haiti Hundreds of students and others protested, calling for Aristide to resign and police fired tear gas, shots were fired and three people were killed in clashes with police.
Haiti Thousands of university students over three days chanted anti-Aristide slogans and Aristide supporters shot at them, and police fired tear gas and shot in the air.
Haiti Thousands of protesters demanding the ouster of Aristide had rocks thrown at them by Aristide supporters and were also shot at, with three people being injured and police fired shots and tear gas.
Haiti Students demonstrated calling for Aristide to step down, and police fired tear gas and arrested three.
Haiti Several hundred anti-government protesters had tear gas fired at them by police and several were arrested; at least 3 were shot and wounded by Aristide supporters.
Haiti More than 10,000 people took part in an anti-government demonstration, and gunmen drove by in a truck and shot at the protesters, and one or two people were killed and police returned fire.
Mexico Gunmen attack a drug rehabilitation center.
Haiti More than 1,000 musicians held a free concert calling for President Aristide's resignation while artists painted rainbows over pro-government graffiti.
Haiti About 2,000 medical students and doctors and others protested against the Aristide government.
Haiti University students organized a protest of thousands against the Aristide government.
Haiti A protest march against President Aristide with dozens of people was held, and police arrested Eliscar Charles, allegedly for organizing an illegal demonstration.
Haiti An anti-government protest was held and police fired tear gas and shot two people; the protesters later re-grouped and were broken up again and a gunfight broke out.
Mexico A gang enters a drug rehabilitation center and opens fire.  Police chase the gang, resulting in a gunfight.
Haiti An anti-government protest led to clashes, with shots being fired.
Haiti Thousands of opposition protesters clashed with Aristide supporters, and one student was shot and killed by Aristide supporters and police used batons on the protesters and shot and killed an Aristide supporter.
Mexico Two men walk into a caf and gun down a drug smuggler.
Haiti Tens of thousands of people participated in an anti-government demonstration, and Aristide partisans threw sticks at the marchers at one point.
Haiti Hundreds of students protesting the death of an anti-government activist had stones hurled at them by Aristide supporters, and police fired tear gas and bullets in the air.
Haiti 4,000 people took part in a rally against Aristide, calling for him to resign and Aristide supporters threw rocks, breaking windows at Haiti's national television station and police repressed the event.
Haiti 200 students and teachers held a protest against Aristide, and police hit some of the students with clubs and fired tear gas and warning shots; students then threw stones at private schools.
Haiti More than 400 students protested against the Aristide government, and after the protest they ran victory laps around a university building.
Haiti About 400 anti-government protesters held a demonstration.
Haiti At least 15,000 protesters called for Aristide's resignation.
Haiti 200 student protesters demanded Aristide's resignation and Aristide supporters hurled rocks at the protesters and police fired tear gas and bullets and detained about 10 protesters; one of the students later died.
Haiti About 15 students set a roadblock ablaze in front of the hospital to protest the death of a student protester and stoned police and police arrested all of them and fired shots in the air.
Haiti Opposition protesters were attacked by Aristide supporters, who fired shots and threw rocks and bottles at them, injuring several. 
Haiti Tens of thousands of government opponents marched to demand Aristide's resignation.
Haiti About 100 students set up flaming tire barricades and threw stones, and police fired tear gas to disperse them.
Haiti 100 students demonstrated outside a courthouse where a protest leader was being questioned and Aristide supporters and opponents threw rocks and bottles and police detained five.
Haiti An anti-government demonstration was held.
Haiti Thousands of protesters marched vowing to repel any attempt to retake the city.
Haiti A protest strike over the return from exile of two former officials linked to human rights abuses under dictatorial regimes was held. 
Haiti Hundreds of high school students protested and hurled rocks at the Education ministry building to demand that their schools be cleared of homeless people so that classes can resume and police fired tear gas.
Guatemala Hundreds of people opposed to the presidential candidacy of former dictator Efrain Rios Montt stage a march.
Guatemala Montt was accused of genocidal actions against indigenous Guatemalans and protesters were present at his trial. 
Mexico Over a dozen people attack the El Buen Tono newspaper offices and set them on fire.
Haiti About 1,000 members of the Democratic Platform held a protest, demanding Aristide's resignation, and police fired tear gas at some of the protesters.
Haiti About 200 protesters demanding Aristide's resignation put roadblocks in the streets and police arrested four of them.
Haiti Thousands of people marched to show support for rebels in Gonaives.
Haiti An anti-government protest of about 1,000 people was broken up by Aristide supporters, who fired on the protesters and threw rocks and bottles at them, injuring at least 14 people.
Mexico Three masked men attack a newspaper office and set it on fire.
Mexico Hundreds of PRI supporters hurl bottles and sticks to prevent court appointed election authorities from reaching their offices.
Haiti Pro-rebel demonstrators held an anti-government protest.
Haiti An arsonist set ablaze a provincial election bureau and destroyed voting materials.
Haiti Someone threw a grenade into the compound of Haiti's electoral office, slightly damaging the structure.
Haiti Two gunmen riding in the back of a pickup truck opened fire on electoral offices, hitting an electricity transformer.
Haiti Aristide supporters demonstrated against the government and against foreign interference in Haiti.
Haiti A protest was held against the government and United States and police used tear gas and a shootout occured between police and protesters and two people were killed; after this, crowds rampaged.
Haiti dozens of young men demonstrated, demanding Aristide's return and the departure of a U.S.-led international peacekeeping force.
Haiti Six armed men stopped two embassy vehicles and fired shots, damaging one of the cars but causing no injuries.
Haiti A protest was held against the police. 
Haiti Police fired tear gas and used batons and fired shots while Marines blocked the entrance of a police academy as thousands of job hunters stormed the building during a recruiting drive; one person was killed from being trampled. 
Haiti 100 men rushed a school that collapsed to try to help with emergency relief efforts, and police and policekeepers drove them away with batons and riot shields and the men threw rocks.
Haiti Thousands of people protested to demand Aristide's return, and police fired tear gas and warning shots; the crowd began hitting government vehicles with rocks; one protester killed in unclear circumstances.
Honduras Workers walk off the job at the state-owned telecom company, demanding higher wages from the government.
Haiti Aristide supporters held a demonstration against the government and U.S.
Haiti Aristide supporters held a demonstration against the government and U.S.
Mexico The attack stemmed from a disagreement regarding control over a sandbank. 
Haiti A protest calling for Aristide's return turned violent and protesters killed three policemen and kidnapped a fourth; the protesters looted shops and exchanged gunfire with security guards and shouted "Down with Bush!"; 7 were killed. 
Haiti About 150 Aristide supporters, some with machetes and guns, staged a protest demanding Aristide's return; they blocked roads using torched cars.
Haiti 100 protesters shouted insults at Haiti's interim Prime Minister and President, accusing them of not doing enough to help flood victims in Gonaives and threw rocks at cars carrying their guards and police fired shots injuring 2.
Haiti A few hundred supporters of Aristide's Lavalas Family party staged a peaceful demonstration.
Honduras A tourist bus is ambushed and robbed.  Two European tourists are murdered.
Haiti About 30 people held a demonstration for peace.
Haiti Several hundred Aristide supporters marched, calling for peace and the return of Aristide from exile.
Haiti 75 public doctors and 65 interns staged a strike to protest overdue pay and to protest a Health Ministry decision to accept private school students in the residency program.
Haiti Protesters demanded that the government fulfill promises made in October to rebuild Gonaives.
Haiti About 500 people marched through two areas of Port-Au-Prince to demand the return of Aristide.
Haiti A pro-Aristide and anti-President Bush march of about 2,000 people was broken up by police, who fired tear gas and shot and killed at least 2 protesters and injuring 10.
Haiti More than 2,000 Aristide supporters staged a peaceful demonstration, accusing police of killing two men during a recent protest.
Haiti Thousands of Aristide supporters, including many women claiming that police had killed their sons, marched to protest alleged police killings.
Haiti About 150 Aristide supporters protested, demanding the release of Aristide loyalists. 
Mexico Farmers were protesting low wages. 
Haiti Thousands of Aristide supporters held a rally calling for his return and shots were fired by an anti-Aristide street gang; later, police fired on the protesters and killed at least one.
Guatemala Peasants occupy farmland, claiming it is being sold to outside parties.  In November, police forces evict the peasants in a violent battle.
Haiti Several thousand protesters demanded Aristide's return, doused a life-size effigy of interim Prime Minister Latortue with gasoline and set it ablaze outside a church.
Mexico Assailants invade a farm and kidnap 27 farm workers.
Nicaragua Gunfire wounded three men when about 60 people shot their way into a farm whose owners retook it by force.
Haiti Hundreds of protesters demanded the return of Aristide and blamed the U.S.-backed interim government and U.N peacekeepers for the dire state of life in Cite Soleil.
Nicaragua An armed mob kills four farmers after a barroom brawl.
Haiti More than 5,000 supporters of ousted President Aristide marched to demand his return from exile, with one protester reportedly shot and killed by police.
Haiti More than a dozen police seeking gang members aligned with Aristide stormed a soccer game; other police and civilians surrounded the stadium, shooting and hacking people with machetes.
Mexico Two federal agents are gunned down.
Haiti More than 10,000 protesters demonstrated in support of former President Preval's bid to regain the presidency and called for the release of political prisoners and the return of Aristide.
Haiti Supreme Court judges fired by Haiti's interim government formed a human chain with law students and court clerks to block their replacements from being sworn in.
Haiti Hundreds of people demonstrated to denounce violence after clashes between gangs and U.N. peacekeepers reportedly left one person dead the day before.
Mexico No reason was provided for the labor protest, but the violence began when federal authorities tried to break the strike. 
Mexico PRI supporters riot after a court decision giving the mayoral race to an opposition party.  They loot the town hall.
Mexico Protesters riot against a planned expropriation of land for a new hydroelectric dam.  Police respond with tear gas.
Haiti Thousands of people held a protest, decrying delays at the polls and the fact that the residents of Cite Soleil were forced to cast ballots in neighboring areas.
Mexico Two gunmen assassinate the number two federal prosecutor in Juarez.
Haiti Thousands of Aristide supporters held a protest march to demand the return of Aristide.
Cuba Three soldiers with automatic rifles escaped from their military base and killed a fellow soldier and wounded another.
Haiti About 150 rape victims marched to demand justice and an end to discrimination against them.
Cuba A ferry boat was hijacked by three men with knives and pistols demanding to go to Florida while in international waters and returned to the Cuba port in Mariel, where the hijackers continued to hold the ferry and its passengers hostage.
Mexico About 30 Lopez Obrador supporters throw eggs at Felipe Calderon's car in Torreon.
Jamaica Bank workers went on strike to demand better salaries and benefits.
Cuba Three men and a woman and her two kidnapped sons tried to seize the fishing boat Ferrocemento No. 18 with knives and guns; other fishermen and officials blocked the boat's path.
Haiti Hundreds of Aristide supporters demonstrated to protest UN operations and called for the return of Aristide from exile.
El Salvador Gunmen assassinate a FMLN leader.
Haiti More than 1,000 Aristide supporters marched to demand the return of Aristide.
Haiti About 5,000 protesters marched to demand Aristide's return from exile and also criticized President Preval and the U.N. peacekeeping force.
Haiti Tens of thousands of people took part in protests against rising food prices and poverty; vehicles were torched and shots were fired and peacekeepers fired at protesters and fired tear gas; at least five people killed.
Haiti Tens of thousands of people took part in protests against rising food prices and poverty; vehicles were torched and shots were fired and peacekeepers fired at protesters and fired tear gas; at least five people killed.
Haiti Tens of thousands of people took part in protests against rising food prices and poverty; vehicles were torched and shots were fired and peacekeepers fired at protesters and fired tear gas; at least five people killed.
Haiti Tens of thousands of people took part in protests against rising food prices and poverty; vehicles were torched and shots were fired and peacekeepers fired at protesters and fired tear gas; at least five people killed.
Haiti Tens of thousands of people took part in protests against rising food prices and poverty; vehicles were torched and shots were fired and peacekeepers fired at protesters and fired tear gas; at least five people killed.
Haiti Tens of thousands of people took part in protests against rising food prices and poverty; vehicles were torched and shots were fired and peacekeepers fired at protesters and fired tear gas; at least five people killed.
Haiti Tens of thousands of people took part in protests against rising food prices and poverty; vehicles were torched and shots were fired and peacekeepers fired at protesters and fired tear gas; at least five people killed.
Haiti Tens of thousands of people took part in protests against rising food prices and poverty; vehicles were torched and shots were fired and peacekeepers fired at protesters and fired tear gas; at least five people killed.
Haiti About 25 Aristide supporters staged a protest calling for his return.
Haiti A small group of protesters threw rocks at police and peacekeepers.
Haiti Hundreds of armed former soldiers stormed an old barracks and prison to demand back pay and also to call for the government to bring back the army to provide security. 
Haiti Hundreds of people threw rocks to protest the high cost of living and peacekeepers fired tear gas to disperse them.
Haiti About 2,000 people looted a warehouse of sugar, rice and condensed milk.
Haiti Aristide supporters protested to demand the resignation of President Preval and threw rocks and bottles at police and police fired shots in the air to disperse them.
Haiti About 2,000 people mobbed a warehouse where U.S. troops were handing out sugar and other dry goods; one soldier fired a warning shot in the air while others tried to force people to form lines.
Haiti Hundreds of people looting a food warehouse owned by a businessman with army connections was fired on by a private security guard, injuring seven.
Haiti Hundreds of Haitians ransacked food warehouses; riot police fired tear gas and shots into the air.
Mexico Around 2100 workers strike for higher wages.
Mexico Around 2100 workers strike for higher wages.
Haiti After a funeral for a priest, 2,000 Aristide supporters carried his coffin to the presidential palace to protest President Preval's policies and his failure to bring Aristide back from exile and rocks were thrown.
Mexico PRI supporters protest to demand that foreign human rights workers be expelled from Chiapas.
Haiti Aristide opponents rioted against the U.N. and some pounded on a car carrying foreign journalists.
Haiti More than 2,000 people protested to demand an increase in Haiti's minimum wage; some of the protesters threw rocks at police and began ripping down flags of U.N. member countries.
Haiti Hundreds of Aristide supporters marched to demand officials reinstate their party in next year's legislative elections as well as the departure of President Preval and the return of Aristide.
Haiti Hundreds gathered at a gravel pit where countless earthquake victims had been dumped and called for the resignation of President Preval and the return of Aristide.
Haiti 50 protesters gathered outside a temporary police headquarters building and chanted against Preval and against the fact that there is no food.
Haiti Small groups of state employees and lawyers held protests, denouncing President Preval's leadership.
Haiti 300 protesters demonstrated outside the Petionville Mayor's office to demand food, water, work, and for their children to go back to school and also accused local officials of demanding bribes for donated food.
Haiti 200 protesters marched toward the US embassy, crying out for food and aid.
Haiti About 200 people demonstrated to protest the lack of shelter.
Haiti About 100 people held a demonstration to protest against living in a camp and also to demand food.
Haiti More than 1,000 protesters demanded shelter.
Haiti A protest was held against foreign troops on the ground in Haiti.
Haiti About 50 residents in a camp of earthquake victims protested to demand more tents.
Haiti A group of about 50 protesters demonstrated because they had not received sufficient relief supplies and were pushed back by baton-wielding police; some protesters were beaten and at least one was arrested.
Haiti About 100 protesters burned tires and an American flag to demand President Aristide's return.
Haiti 2,000 protesters demanded Preval's resignation and workers for USAID joined the demonstration to protest the agency's decision to stop providing them with food as part of their compensation and counterprotesters threw rocks.
Haiti 2,000 protesters demanded Preval's resignation and workers for USAID joined the demonstration to protest the agency's decision to stop providing them with food as part of their compensation and counterprotesters threw rocks.
Haiti 2,000 protesters demanded Preval's resignation and workers for USAID joined the demonstration to protest the agency's decision to stop providing them with food as part of their compensation and counterprotesters threw rocks.
Haiti 2,000 protesters demanded Preval's resignation and workers for USAID joined the demonstration to protest the agency's decision to stop providing them with food as part of their compensation and counterprotesters threw rocks.
Haiti 2,000 protesters demanded Preval's resignation and workers for USAID joined the demonstration to protest the agency's decision to stop providing them with food as part of their compensation and counterprotesters threw rocks.
Haiti 2,000 protesters demanded Preval's resignation and workers for USAID joined the demonstration to protest the agency's decision to stop providing them with food as part of their compensation and counterprotesters threw rocks.
Haiti 1,000 people protested against Preval, saying he failed the nation; they kicked police barriers; eleven protesters were arrested; on May 18, a tire was burned in front of a university in an anti-Preval protest.
Haiti Between 8,000 and 12,000 farmers protested against the government and against the U.S. corporation Monsanto, claiming that they are being given maize seeds that could threaten local varieties.
Haiti About 100 people held a demonstration, claiming that the government is failing on its promises to provide housing.
Haiti A police inspector disguised in a woman's dress killed a former mayoral candidate, and as the gunman was pursued he shot and killed an officer and he was shot and killed.
Mexico Gunmen break into the home of a former PRD lawmaker and assassinate him, two family members, and an employee.
Nicaragua More than 2000 people march to call for the arrest of a former president for his role in a corruption scandal.
Nicaragua Thousands demonstrate to celebrate the removal of national assembly leaders that blocked corruption charges against assembly speaker and ex-president Arnoldo Aleman.
Mexico Galeana was a known Tierra Caliente gang leader. 
Guatemala No reason was provided for the murder, but Palomo was the attorney who represented Efrain Rios Montt who was recently found guilty for genocidal actions. 
Mexico A gunman disguised as a clown guns down a convicted drug lord.
Haiti Presidential candidates led a march demanding officials annul the results of the presidential election and some demonstrators threw rocks at police and police fired warning shots.
Haiti Hundreds chanted against Preval and the Provisional Elecoral Council and against the head of the UN mission; riot police broke up the anti-Preval protestors with tear gas and a UN truck was hit with rocks.
Haiti INITE party headquarters were set ablaze after election results were announced and thousands of Martelly supporters demonstrated; gunshots were fired and five people were killed and tear gas was fired.
Haiti INITE party headquarters were set ablaze after election results were announced and thousands of Martelly supporters demonstrated; gunshots were fired and five people were killed and tear gas was fired.
Haiti INITE party headquarters were set ablaze after election results were announced and thousands of Martelly supporters demonstrated; gunshots were fired and five people were killed and tear gas was fired.
Haiti INITE party headquarters were set ablaze after election results were announced and thousands of Martelly supporters demonstrated; gunshots were fired and five people were killed and tear gas was fired.
Haiti More than 100 protesters demanded democratic elections in Port-Au-Prince and Gonaives.
Haiti More than 100 protesters demanded democratic elections in Port-Au-Prince and Gonaives.
Haiti 30 protesters demonstrated to protest the results of an international election report and shots were fired by some armed protesters at police and one person was killed by police.
Haiti Several hundred Duvalier supporters gathered outside a court where Duvalier was being questioned and chanted slogans and called for the arrest of President Preval.
Haiti About 100 protesters demonstrated to demand the annulment of Haiti's presidential election.
Haiti Between 50 and 200 anti-preval demonstrators protested and hurled rocks to demand Preval leave office after it was announced he would stay in office an additional three months.
Haiti Several thousand Aristide supporters protested to demand his return and vowing to derail a runoff election unless he returns.
Haiti 60 to 80 protesters pitched tents and laid down in the middle of one of the busiest streets in Port-Au-Prince to protest efforts to remove them from a private lot where they have been living since the 2010 earthquake.
Haiti About 20 students burned tires in a call for justice after a fellow student was shot and wounded during a robbery.
Haiti A protest of 100 to 400 people took place as a senior French government official arrived at the hospital.
Jamaica Workers went on strike to protest treatment by managers at plants.
Jamaica Workers went on strike to protest treatment by managers at plants.
Haiti Several thousand people marched to protest what they say is a lack of housing.
Haiti Vigilantes went from house to house looking for FRAPH members, found a member's house and bloodied his wife's face, then killed a man with a machete outside, then went back to the FRAPH member's house and killed him.
Haiti Thousands of Aristide supporters marched, accusing President Martelly of not doing enough to improve their lives and pressed for the departure of U.N. peacekeepers.
Haiti Several hundred remnants of the disbanded army along with hopeful recruits, marched to call for Martelly to fulfill his campaign pledge of restoring the armed forces.
Haiti 50 former soldiers entered the premises of parliament and demanded to speak to deputies about government and police plans to expel them from the old military camps.
Haiti Former soldiers demonstrated to call for reinstating the army and demand payment of their pensions; some people threw rocks and peacekeepers fired tear gas; gunfire was exchanged between marchers and police.
Haiti Former soldiers demonstrated to call for reinstating the army and demand payment of their pensions; some people threw rocks and peacekeepers fired tear gas; gunfire was exchanged between marchers and police.
Haiti More than 1,000 people erected flaming barricades to protest against government plans to evict them from homes and some threw rocks at police and at passing cars, who fired tear gas.
Haiti About 100 people protested against a government plan that threatens to demolish their homes.
Haiti Several thousand protesters demonstrated against the high cost of living, rising food prices and allegations of corruption in President Martelly's administration.
Haiti Several hundred protesters angry over rising costs of living called for Haitian President Martin Martelly to resign.
Haiti Thousands poured into the streets to demand more government action to curb rising consumer prices and President Martelly's resignation.
Haiti Thousands of Aristide supporters follow him to a court hearing, demonstrating their support.
Haiti More than 1000 people protest against homosexuality and a proposal to legalize gay marriage.
Haiti Thousands of people march to mark the anniversary of the 1991 ousting of Jean-Bertrand Aristide.  Riot police arrive and break up the demonstration.  Protesters respond by setting up fiery barricades.
Haiti Thousands take to the streets to call for the resignation of the president and to protest against poverty and unemployment.  The protest turns violent, and police use tear gas.
Haiti Protesters call on the president to step down and for the liberation of an attorney who was recently incarcerated.  The protesters set up burning barricades and clash with police, who respond with tear gas.
Haiti Students protest outside the presidential offices about classroom conditions.  They burn tires and hurl stones at police.
Haiti Thousands of people march to protest against the president.  Counter-demonstrators attack the protesters by throwing rocks from rooftops and alleyways.  Police respond with tear gas.
Haiti Anti-government protesters demonstrate against the president, alleging corruption and also decrying the high cost of living.  The protesters clash with pro-government forces, and police fire tear gas into the crowds.
Haiti Anti-government protesters march to call on the president to resign, and to call upon the US to stop supporting the president.
Haiti 2000 people protest a recent court decision in the Dominican Republic that would strip the citizenship of generations of people of Haitian descent living there.
Haiti Hundreds protest, claiming that a proposed increase to the minimum wage does not go far enough.
Haiti Protesters were calling for overdue elections 
Haiti Protesters were calling for elections that are overdue for three years and they were criticizing Martelly
Haiti Students were protesting that schools have been closed for three days due to a teacher strike caused by low and withheld wages. 
Jamaica Maise was pulled from house in Park Lane neighborhood and shot to death.
Haiti Protesters were demonstrating for the president's resignation and delayed elections.
Haiti Protesters were calling for the President's and Vice-President's resignation. 
Haiti Youthful protesters were demonstrating against the government.
Haiti 6,000 protesters were rioting against high fuel costs and living costs. 
Mexico The bus drivers were protesting violence from gangs targeting buses and bus drivers. 
Guatemala About 20 bus drivers block several streets to demand that authorities capture and prosecute gang members who have been extorting and killing them.
Trinidad and Tobago Demonstrators demanding jobs damaged a van and blocked a road with debris during protests outside a gas plant.
Haiti People were demonstrating against the recent elections, calling them fraudulent. 
Haiti People were calling the recent elections fixed. 
Haiti Protesters were demonstrating against what they perceived to be fraudulent elections. 
Dominican Republic Citizens demonstrated to protest re-election of President Joaquin Balaguer, one killed by police gunfire.
Dominican Republic Doctors and teachers went on strike to demand 100% wage increase.
Dominican Republic Demonstrations occurred to protest government spending on Columbus celebrations, one killed when police fired on crowd.
Dominican Republic Demonstrations occurred to protest government spending on Columbus celebrations, one killed when police fired on crowd.
Dominican Republic Demonstrations occurred to protest government spending on Columbus celebrations, one killed when police fired on crowd.
Dominican Republic Demonstrations occurred to protest government spending on Columbus celebrations, two killed when police fired on crowd.
Dominican Republic Hundreds violently demonstrated, looted, and attacked police in reaction to decision to raise public bus fares.
Dominican Republic The country's 8500 public hosptial nurses went on strike to demand a pay hike and benefits.
Dominican Republic Families occupied 3 churches to demand housing units promised by government.
Dominican Republic All of nation's public doctors went on strike to demand housing, elimination of tariffs on cars, and higher salaries.
Dominican Republic Youths staged violent demonstration to protest killing of gang member Juan Carlos Mateo.
Mexico About 100 protesters gathered in front of the German embassy to protest German arms manufacturers selling arms to crooked police departments and officers. 
Dominican Republic Students violently demonstrated to protest government budget for Autonomous Univ. of Santo Domingo.
Haiti Hundreds of people descended on the main port and looted beer, boxes of chicken parts, pork loins and jet skis; fights then broke out between the looters and at least one was wounded. 
Mexico Protesters demanding the governor's resignation march through the city.
Dominican Republic Doctors went on strike to demand raises and improvements to medical facilities.
Mexico Thousands of people take to the streets to demand the governor's resignation and briefly take two men hostage.
Dominican Republic Inmates launched a noisy protest to demand the right of sexual relations with their partners.
Dominican Republic Teachers went on strike to demand payment of bonuses.
Dominican Republic Doctors went on strike to demand better pay and working conditions.
Dominican Republic Street vendors demonstrated after police ordered them off of street and into nearby park.
Dominican Republic Health care workers broke down a wall to enter Congress to voice concerns over privatization of health care.
Haiti About 100 workers staged a strike to demand higher wages and health benefits.
Dominican Republic 2000 Haitians and more than 100 Dominicans gathered to denounce killing of Haitian immigrant by authorities.
Dominican Republic Demonstrators violently protested killing of man by police, 2 citizens killed.
Mexico Workers at Mexico's largest copper mine strike to demand better safety conditions.  Police and miners clash in January after the strike is declared illegal.
Dominican Republic Liberation party supporters burned garbage and tree limbs to protest election results.
Dominican Republic Demonstrators burned two utility offices in protest of frequent blackouts.
Dominican Republic Demonstrators violently protested to demand cheaper food, gas, & electricity, while schools and business also closed.
Dominican Republic Journalists demonstrated against U.S. military invasion of Iraq.
Dominican Republic Citizens demonstrated to protest austerity measures including import taxes and spending cuts.
Dominican Republic Haitians in custody in D.R. rioted in response to likely repatriation.
Dominican Republic Doctors at state hospitals went on strike to deman 100% salary increase.
Panama About 6000 Panama Canal workers strike to demand higher wages.
Panama Workers expanding the Panama Canal are on strike demanding higher wages. 
Panama Workers expanding the canal protested against unsafe working conditions. 
Mexico Steel workers strike to protest the firing of their national union leader.  The strike escalates to a riot on April 20 when authorities unsuccessfully try to remove workers from an occupied plant, leaving two dead.  The strike ends in August.
Dominican Republic Citizens burned tires, blocked streets to protest blackouts.
Dominican Republic Students violently demonstrated to protest a lack of materials, preventing president from inaugurating a library after hurling rocks at motorcade.
Dominican Republic Doctors went on strike to demand higher wages and new equipment.
Mexico 2000 members of the PRI protest against alleged electoral fraud in Gerrero state, alleging that two mayors of the leftist PRD assumed office by fraud.  The protesters seize government buildings.
Dominican Republic Demonstrators marched to call for an end to violent crime.
Dominican Republic Demonstrators riding on horses and donkeys led a protest against a transportation tax increase.
Dominican Republic Doctors went on strike to demand higher salaries and better working conditions.
Dominican Republic Doctors went on strike to demand wage increases and improved working conditions.
Mexico 2000 members of the PRI protest against alleged electoral fraud in Gerrero state, alleging that two mayors of the leftist PRD assumed office by fraud.  The protesters seize government buildings.
Dominican Republic Truck drivers went on strike to protest proposal to raise the fuel tax.
Dominican Republic Demonstrators protested to demand more government spending on public education.
Dominican Republic Demonstrating teachers marched more than 120 miles to demand wage increases and increased education funding.
Dominican Republic University faculty and staff went on strike to demand higher salaries, benefits.
Dominican Republic Citizens demonstrated outside D.R. Congress to demand increased spending on public education.
Dominican Republic Dominican-Haitians demonstrated to demand protection of their rights.
Dominican Republic Thousands protest in two unspecified cities over plans to raise taxes to close the budget deficit.
Dominican Republic More than 100 Haitian migrants protest in front of the Labor Department to demand payment from a coconut company that went bankrupt.
Dominican Republic Doctors and nurses at public hospitals strike to demand pay raises.
Jamaica Protesters demonstrated against pro-government protesters.
Jamaica 130 Air Jamaica flight attendants went on strike to demand better pay.
Mexico Marines raid a house controlled by the Gulf cartel, resulting in the death of the leader of the Gulf cartel.
Jamaica All of Jamaica's 18,000 teachers went on strike to demand pay hike.
Jamaica Alumina workers went on strike at Alcoa plant after negotiations broke down.
Jamaica Cuban refugees went on hunger strike to protest repatriation back to Cuba.
Jamaica Demonstrators blocked roads with tires and concrete to protest poor road conditions and lack of potable water.
Mexico 16 armed men enter a bar and kill 10 people.
Jamaica Nation's 200 gasoline truck drivers went on strike to demand higher wages and improved medical coverage.
Jamaica Hundreds rioted to protest killing of car wash owner.
Cuba Pro-government demonstration occurred outside home where meeting of dissidents occurred, chanting anti-U.S. slogans and support for Castro.
Jamaica Nearly all Jamaican teachers went on strike as part of Jamaica Teachers' Association demands for additional fringe benefits.
Jamaica Jamaica's 24 maritime pilots staged a 4 day strike to protest taxation of travel allowances and their vehicles.
Jamaica Dozens participated in peaceful demonstration to protest higher taxes and gas prices, most were from Labour Party.
Jamaica Rioters blocked road, burned police cars, and threw rocks at police to protest shooting of taxi driver
Jamaica About 1/4 of nation's police officers called in sick to demand pay raises.
Dominican Republic Truckers block the main route into Haiti to protest an increase in attacks on truckers in the Haitian capital.
Jamaica Residents demonstrated to protest wave of shootings and demand more police protection in capital.
Jamaica Doctors went on strike to protest layoffs and demand new contracts.
Haiti Pierre Elisem, owner of Radio Hispaniola, was shot and critically wounded by several gunmen who accused him of working for rebels.
Jamaica Thousands attended funeral paid for by JLP for those killed in police raid.
Jamaica Air traffic controllers went on strike to demand new radar system.
Jamaica Business leaders staged a silent protest in Parliament to oppose an electricity tax.
Jamaica Hundreds of bus drivers went on strike to protest the killing of fellow driver Harold Collins.
Jamaica Hundreds of bus drivers went on strike to protest the killing of fellow driver Harold Collins.
Nicaragua Farmers were protesting against the construction of the canal to link the Caribbean to the Pacific that farmers worry will confiscate farmer's land and negatively affect water quality. 
Jamaica Edwards was wounded while campaigning by two attackers with knives.
Nicaragua Protesters demonstrated against the inter-oceanic canal project groundbreaking. 
Nicaragua Protesters were demonstrating against the building of the inter-oceanic canal. 
Jamaica Dozens of citizens marched and created roadblocks to protest police killing of Linton Rodney.
Jamaica Residents protested and blocked roads, set fire to 4 buiildings in response to police killing of boy.
Jamaica Thousands rioted to protest police shooting of two men, buses were burnt and roads blocked.
Jamaica Ministers debate escalated into melee, opposition member used mace to prevent government from leaving.
Jamaica Hundreds rioted, attacking police station and burning cars after student shot by police.
Jamaica Several unions (including 20K teachers) boycotted agreement of wage freeze.
Jamaica Inmates rioted at prison over complaints that they were denied visits.
Haiti 20 armed assailants attacked a hydroelectric plant, killing two security agents and wounding two police officers and cutting power cables and shooting up the dam's control tower.
Mexico Members of the Central American Salvatrucha gang attack a train full of illegal immigrants and rob them.
Mexico An in law of the governor of Morales is kidnapped, and then freed.
Haiti Seven armed men in civilian clothes forced their way into the offices of Radio Galaxie and shot up the offices, smashed equipment and beat up two employees.
Jamaica About 12 air traffic controllers called in sick to protest pace of wage negotiations.
Jamaica About 12 air traffic controllers called in sick to protest pace of wage negotiations.
Jamaica Hundreds gathered to protest against crime and call on politicians to disassociate themselves from criminals.
Jamaica Demonstrators blocked roads to protest cost of water, electricity, and bus fares. Policeman shot, another man killed.
Mexico Sectarian violence erupts between Indian coverts to evangelical Protestantism and a traditional Indian form of Catholicism.
Mexico Two men open fire on an indigenous group that attacked illegal loggers a year prior.  The activists were on their way to investigate reports of illegal logging when they were attacked.
Jamaica Coffee farmers demonstrated outside government offices to demand payment of insurance money for hurricane damage.
Mexico Miners at the Naica lead mine strike for a wage hike.
Mexico Four men burst into a restaurant and kill six people, including two informants for the US DEA.
Mexico Protesters were expressing displeasure over legislature that opens Mexican oil and gas reserves and industry to foreign investment. 
Mexico PAN and PRD demonstrators accuse the PRI of fraud in the recent midterm elections.
Mexico PAN and PRD demonstrators accuse the PRI of fraud in the recent midterm elections.
Mexico PAN supporters accuse the PRI of electoral fraud in state elections.  They protest and burn down the state electoral commission office.  Police respond with tear gas and beatings.
Jamaica Gangs forced more than 200 people from homes in effort to takeover communities in gang dispute.
Jamaica Man trying to see PM over tax issue slashed police officer's throat.
Jamaica Residents demonstrated outside police station to protest extradition of Coke.
Jamaica Police stations attacked as police & gangs fought across city over extradition of Coke, 60 killed. State of emergency declared.
Jamaica Police stations attacked as police & gangs fought across city over extradition of Coke, 60 killed. State of emergency declared.
Jamaica Police stations attacked as police & gangs fought across city over extradition of Coke, 60 killed. State of emergency declared.
Jamaica Police stations attacked as police & gangs fought across city over extradition of Coke, 73 civilians and 3 security officials killed. State of emergency declared.
Jamaica Medical workers went on strike to demand pay raises and allowances.
Jamaica 60 people protest to demand an end to police shootings.
Jamaica About 80 demonstrators march to deliver a petition demanding an investigation into a raid on a public housing complex in 2010.
Haiti A handful of protesters were yelling outside Baby Doc's funeral procession denouncing him and his rule. 
Trinidad and Tobago Between 9,000 and 10,000 sugar workers staged a strike over the non-payment of wages.
Trinidad and Tobago Between 9,000 and 10,000 sugar workers staged a strike over the non-payment of wages.
Trinidad and Tobago More than 400 Muslims in Trinidad protested the U.S. led air campaign in Afghanistan, burning a U.S. flag and carrying placards.
Trinidad and Tobago Public sector doctors staged a six-day strike, demanding equal pay with regional doctors and better working conditions.
Trinidad and Tobago Public sector doctors staged a six-day strike, demanding equal pay with regional doctors and better working conditions.
Trinidad and Tobago Public sector doctors staged a six-day strike, demanding equal pay with regional doctors and better working conditions.
Trinidad and Tobago 150 members of the Constitutional Reform Forum group marched in Port-of-Spain to push for constitutional reform.
Trinidad and Tobago About 100 public doctors staged a strike over provisions in their contracts.
Trinidad and Tobago About 100 public doctors staged a strike over provisions in their contracts.
Trinidad and Tobago About 15 Venezuelans living in Trinidad demonstrated outside their embassy, demanding President Hugo Chavez call snap elections.
Trinidad and Tobago A group of disabled people protested in front of the state-owned flour company because of alleged job discrimination.
Trinidad and Tobago Trinidad's public prosecutors staged a one-day strike as they demanded higher pay and better working conditions.
Trinidad and Tobago Villagers blocked a road to protest a rise in kidnappings and police response.
Trinidad and Tobago Two opposition members of Trinidad and Tobago's parliament were among 10 people arrested Monday during a protest march against crime; some 2,000 people protested.
Guatemala Jorge Carpio Nicole, cousin of the president and two-time presidential candidate, is assassinated with three body guards.
Honduras Three assailants lob a bomb at the house of a man who ran for president in the 1980s.
Trinidad and Tobago Approximately four thousand teachers marched through Port-of-Spain demanding higher wages.
Trinidad and Tobago An estimated ten thousand opposition supporters  participated in an 8-mile march that began in Couva and ended in Chaguanas.
Trinidad and Tobago An estimated ten thousand opposition supporters  participated in an 8-mile march that began in Couva and ended in Chaguanas.
Trinidad and Tobago About 300 people held an anti-crime protest at Trinidad's airport.
Trinidad and Tobago 3,000 protesters rallied, cheering and honking as they passed the prison holding  Basdeo Panday, was Trinidad's first prime minister of East Indian descent.
Trinidad and Tobago 3,000 protesters rallied, cheering and honking as they passed the prison holding  Basdeo Panday, was Trinidad's first prime minister of East Indian descent.
Trinidad and Tobago 10,000 people took part in a 'death march' to protest rising crime and murder.
Trinidad and Tobago 400 workers walked off the job and demonstrated outside the  Petrotrin plant to press the government to implement a work safety bill and to regularize scores of temporary employees.
Trinidad and Tobago 200 workers at Trinidad's state-owned oil company walked off the job to demand higher wages.
Trinidad and Tobago Some 4,400 state oil workers called a strike to draw attention to crime and corruption; the Oilfields Workers' Trade Union is also demanding improved infrastructure and better health care benefits.
Trinidad and Tobago Environmental activist Wayne Kublalsingh staged a 15-day hunger strike to protest against a road project that he claimed will fracture the lives of numerous families and severely damage wetlands.
Dominican Republic Llenas and Rodriguez carried out kidnapping and murder of Aybar, planned by Palmas.
Mexico 16000 peasants march on governing party headquarters to demand land reform.
Mexico Peasant demonstrators take to the streets after a priest is thrown in jail for aligning himself with the peasants in a land dispute.
Mexico 500 peasants walk from Tabasco to Mexico City to protest alleged fraud in municipal elections.
Mexico 2000 sellers of subsidized tortillas and flour strike to demand an increase in government controlled prices that would give them a greater profit margin.
Mexico Homeless protesters gather outside a government office to protest about a sewer explosion.  Police arrive and beat them.  Five officers are eventually arrested and charged.
Guatemala A journalist is assassinated.  Rightist death squads are suspected.
Mexico About 20000 demonstrators demand government relocation from public housing damaged in a massive earthquake eight years prior.
Haiti Two gunmen opened fire on the home of Journalist Michele Montas, killing security guard Maxim Seide.
Mexico 30000 teachers strike over new laws that cut pensions and delay retirements.  Others stage hunger strikes over NAFTA.
Mexico An anti-NAFTA rally occurs.
Mexico A lone man stages a hunger strike on the Mexico City streets, protesting the lack of environmental protections in the new NAFTA treaty.
Mexico Hundreds of opposition party activists block a highway, denouncing alleged election fraud.  Police clash with the protestors.
Mexico Hundreds of thousands take to the streets to demand an end to army suppression of the indigenous uprising in Chiapas.
Mexico Indigenous peasants accuse city hall of corruption and block the main road leading into town.
Mexico Indigenous peasants accuse city hall of corruption and block the main road leading into town.
Mexico Indigenous peasants accuse city hall of corruption and block the main road leading into town.
Mexico Indigenous peasants accuse city hall of corruption and block the main road leading into town.
Mexico Indigenous peasants accuse city hall of corruption and block the main road leading into town.
Mexico The PRD marched into Mexico City, demanding political reform.
Mexico Tens of thousands of indigenous persons and their sympathizers take over town halls throughout Chiapas and march on Mexico City in order to pressure the government for a favorable peace settlement.  
Mexico Tens of thousands of indigenous persons and their sympathizers take over town halls throughout Chiapas and march on Mexico City in order to pressure the government for a favorable peace settlement.  
Mexico Tens of thousands of indigenous persons and their sympathizers take over town halls throughout Chiapas and march on Mexico City in order to pressure the government for a favorable peace settlement.  
Mexico Tens of thousands of indigenous persons and their sympathizers take over town halls throughout Chiapas and march on Mexico City in order to pressure the government for a favorable peace settlement.  
Mexico 2000 Indian peasants march through the streets, painting rebel slogans on the walls and staging a sit-in at city hall.
Mexico Dozens of peasant and Indian groups caravan to Mexico City and then protest to show support for the EZLN rebels on the 75th anniversary of Emiliano Zapata's death, and to demand greater democracy.
Honduras Protesters were demonstrating against a Social Security fraud in which marked-up goods and sent money to the National Party. 
Honduras Protesters were demonstrating against a Social Security fraud in which marked-up goods and sent money to the National Party. 
Mexico 50 peasants occupy a major downtown intersection, demanding land reform and Indian rights.
Mexico 300 Indian peasants block a highway and set a police car on fire.
Mexico Hundreds of protesting farm workers camp downtown to demand that the government cease repression of farm workers.
Honduras Protesters were calling for the president's resignation because of the social security scandal. 
Mexico About 130 Chiapas ranchers and small farmers maintain a sit-in hunger strike, demanding the government end the rebellion.
Mexico 400 peasants block several major highways, demanding the government fulfill promises to build health clinics, promote cattle ranching, and build roads.  Another group protests high electricity prices. 
Mexico Peasants hold demonstrations in honor of the 1910 Mexican Revolution and to show support for the EZLN.  Protests escalate to riots, and police use tear gas.
Honduras Students were protesting the presidential involvement in the social security fraud. 
Mexico Hundreds of farmers ride their tractors into the main square to call for a nationwide moratorium on payments of past-due agricultural loans.
Mexico 3000 Indian peasants protest the inauguration of a PRI governor in their state.  They then inaugurate their own governor, representing the PRD.
Mexico 3000 Indian peasants protest the inauguration of a PRI governor in their state.  They then inaugurate their own governor, representing the PRD.
Mexico PRD supporters protest against an election result by blockading state oil drilling sites.
Mexico 30,000 people protest over an economic crisis, which led to a massive devaluation in the peso.
Mexico 500 well-dressed demonstrators march on the presidential palace to protest austerity measures.
Nicaragua A group of armed men kill a judge.
Mexico Tens of thousands of PRD supporters protest against the president's policies toward the Zapatistas.
Mexico Thousands stage an anti-war protest in support of a peaceful solution to the Chiapas conflict.
Mexico Debtors surround the Interior Ministry to protest soaring interest rates.
Mexico 3000 teachers march to demand pay increases.
Mexico Tens of thousands protest against government austerity.
Mexico Thousands of transport drivers protest government decision to declare a bus line insolvent and lay off its workers.  They also protest the arrest of the driver's union.
Mexico 150,000 marchers protest the devalued peso, layoffs, high taxes and interest rate hikes associated with the Mexican financial crisis.
Mexico Hundreds of peasants blockade the stock market, led by the losing candidate in the prior year's gubernatorial race in Tabasco state.
Mexico Street vendors clash with police over a ban on illegal commerce in the city square.
Haiti Two men shot and killed the head of the Justice Ministry security guard as he was having a flat tire repaired at a service station.
Mexico Unemployed garbage collectors and laid-off bus drivers march against the ongoing economic crisis, demanding the government give their jobs back.
Mexico Thousands of stall owners march in response to rumors that the government will privatize public markets.
Haiti Mayor Dongot Joseph allegedly beat Judge Feliton Gauthier, a justice of the peace; he and several aides were arrested on April 19.
Mexico Several thousand people rally on the anniversary of a 1968 student massacre.  The protest quickly turns into a rally about economic conditions; the protesters beat up two motorists and hijack and burn several buses.
Mexico 300 protesters gather outside a courthouse as a rebel leader is arraigned.
Mexico Protesters march against proposed changes to the social security system.
Mexico Protesters march against proposed changes to the social security system.
Mexico Protesters march against proposed changes to the social security system.
Mexico Students, unionists, and various organizations gather to protest a wave of privatizations and to show support for the Zapatistas.
Mexico Protesters rally against government handling of an air pollution emergency.
Mexico 15,000 people march to protest against the privatization of a petrochemical plant.
Mexico Indigenous Mexicans launch a hunger strike to prod the federal government to offer them social programs, aid, and farm land.
Mexico Over 100,000 protestors takes to the streets on May Day to protest against currency devaluation and unemployment.
Mexico Teachers protest for higher pay.  Police crack down violently.  The police chief is eventually fired for the incident.
Honduras Protesters demonstrate repeatedly against the armed men that committed Honduras' first child kidnapping.
Mexico A used car salesman leads hundreds of business owners in a protest against kidnappings and extortion.  He is shot dead several hours later.
Mexico Protesters block streets demanding the withdrawal of army troops mobilized into the countryside, particularly in the hills of Guerrero, Oaxaca, and other states.
Honduras Thousands of people across Honduras protest a wave of journalist killings.
Mexico Thousands march on Columbus Day in favor of indigenous rights.
Mexico Activist priests and peasants ambush police in apparent retaliation for the eviction of peasants who had seized lands in the region.
Mexico Thousands of people march to demand the release of two jailed priests arrested in connection with the deaths of two police officers.
Mexico More than 750 police and army troops raid the nation's top security prison after officials receive repeated warnings that two of the western hemisphere's most notorious drug bosses had joined forces behind bars.
Nicaragua An ex-Contra leader fires shots and takes hostages at the offices of a newspaper over claims that the son of ex-president Arnoldo Aleman had been assassinated.
Mexico A masked gunmen enters a dance hall and opens fire, killing five musicians of a popular norteno band, and four customers.
Haiti Police arrested labor union members.
Mexico Protests occur across Mexico to honor Emiliano Zapata.  Protesters consist in Indians demonstrating over ethnic issues and land distribution.
Haiti Clashes broke out after a county sheriff and his deputies attempted to evict peasants occupying disputed land; the two deputies and one peasant were killed in an initial confrontation and 12 people were killed total.
Mexico About 70 gunmen loyal to a local faction of the PRI descend upon an Indian village, massacring Tzotzil Indians and members of an EZLN affiliated group called Las Abejas.  Many of the killers were political rivals.
Mexico About 70 gunmen loyal to a local faction of the PRI descend upon an Indian village, massacring Tzotzil Indians and members of an EZLN affiliated group called Las Abejas.  Many of the killers were political rivals.
Mexico 10 Zeta gunmen intercept Latin American migrants on a highway. They tie up the migrants and take them to a ranch, where they demand the migrants work for the gang.  When most refuse, they are killed. 
Mexico Teachers protest for higher pay.
Mexico Dozens of people from the Lebanese immigrant community march to the Lebanese embassy to protest against the Israeli-Lebanon war.
Mexico Thousands of rebels and their supporters march from San Cristobal to Mexico City to press for greater Indian rights.
Mexico 100 residents of the Buenos Aires neighborhood of Mexico City rally outside a police state to rally against police brutality.
Haiti About 50 pro-government thugs attacked legislators, injuring at least five of them; police are also likely involved because they failed to stop the attack.
Mexico Students march to demand a full government accounting for a 1968 massacre of hundreds of peaceful demonstrators.  Several people are injured when marchers attack cars, buses, and loot stores.
Panama Hundreds of enraged government employees set upon lawmakers with rocks and clubs as they leave the National Assembly just minutes after passing a law allowing the firing of public workers who support a coup.  
Mexico Thousands march against Columbus Day.  Mayan natives demand land and the fulfillment of government peace promises.
Mexico Thousands march against Columbus Day.  Mayan natives demand land and the fulfillment of government peace promises.
Mexico Thousands march against Columbus Day.  Mayan natives demand land and the fulfillment of government peace promises.
Mexico Army forces arrive at a base to arrest members of the Zorros for the massacre of six teenagers. Police take over their own base and barricade themselves inside to protest the arrests. Zorros surrender after 14 hour standoff.
Mexico Gustavo Guerrero, a farmer, sets himself on fire to protest local authorities, who had prevented him from selling melons in the main square.
Mexico About 400 Indians march to Acteal to demand punishment of government officials they accuse of complicity in the massacre there.
Mexico 4000 people march on the fourth anniversary of the Zapatista uprising and mourn the death of 45 people in Acteal.
Mexico 4000 people march on the fourth anniversary of the Zapatista uprising and mourn the death of 45 people in Acteal.
Mexico Hundreds of townspeople protest against journalists and the government over arrests made in the town, denying that anyone in the town was responsible for the Acteal massacre.
Mexico Zapatista supporters protest against the Acteal massacre, and then clash with police in Ocosingo.  Police open fire, resulting in one death.
Mexico Zapatista supporters demand punishment for police officers who fired on demonstrators.
Mexico Zapatista supporters gather outside government office buildings and shout at soldiers on the day of a funeral for a woman shot dead at a protest.
Mexico Conatram initiates a strike to demand that the government resolve a number of labor issues.
Mexico 3000 Indians protest on the anniversary of Emiliano Zapata's death.  They demand democracy and land rights for Indians.
Guatemala A crowd accuses the mayor of a small town of bringing people from El Salvador to cast votes in his favor.  They riot, setting a voting booth on fire.  Police disperse them with tear gas.
Mexico The PRI presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio is assassinated by Mario Aburto Martinez.  Despite many conspiracy theories, a true motive is never learned.
Haiti A pro-Aristide crowd rioted.
Mexico 50,000 telephone workers stage a two hour walkout to protest a new 15 percent tax on telephone services.
Mexico Thousands camp outside the Congress to protest against the president's budget during a time of financial crisis.
Haiti Cpl. Mandelus Norelus detained a man accused of stealing fruit, cut off part of his ear, made him eat it and then carved the initials S.H. - for Saddam Hussein - into the man's buttocks and beat him.
Mexico Members of the armed forces in full military dress marched through the streets of Mexico City, protesting against the naming of a defense minister without consultation of active generals.
Mexico Rebel sympathizers march to commemorate the one year anniversary of a massacre in Acteal.
Mexico 30 protesters camp outside the Monument of Independence, and then gather outside the stock exchange to demand changes in the government's policy in Chiapas.
Mexico Hundreds of ethnic Indian rebel supporters march to celebrate the anniversary of the Chiapas uprising.
Mexico More than 100 alleged leftist rebels held in a prison stage a hunger strike to demand the liberation of all political prisoners in Mexico.
Mexico 15,000 people march to Mexico City to protest alleged electoral fraud.
Mexico Dozens of women march to demand police action against a wave of rapes and murders.
Mexico Thousands of students protest a tuition hike at National Autonomous University.
Mexico 100,000 people march to protest against privatization of the country's electricity system.
Mexico Thousands of leftist party activists black streets in an effort to stop the inauguration of a new governor.
Mexico Thousands of students strike to protest tuition fees and take over about 40 schools throughout the UNAM university.  The students regularly stage massive demonstrations.  The strike eventually widens to include unionists and teachers. 
Mexico Teachers protest to demand salary hikes.
Mexico 14,000 union members protest government plans to increase private investment in the state owned electric power industry.
Mexico 600 police protest for higher pay.  During the march, protesters recognize a police commander in civilian clothes and beat him up.
Haiti Marie-Michele de Ronceray, wife of conservative politician Hubert de Ronceray, was shot in the left shoulder by assailants as she was being driven home.
Mexico Two people are wounded in election related violence.
Mexico Prisoners stage a small riot over a recent flood that inundated the prison.
Mexico Hundreds of people block a highway to protest sandbagging that they say compounded recent flooding.  Police beat and arrest many of the protesters.
Mexico Hundreds of prisoners take over a prison to protest flood inundation and food shortages.
Mexico Rebel sympathizers commemorate the Zapatista rebellion.
Mexico Hundreds of riot police march to demand salary increases and the dismissal of their commander.
Haiti About 15 gunmen opened fire in a marketplace and set fire to merchandise; one person was injured.
Mexico Thousands of people march to protest the deployment of security forces seeking to prevent students from seizing the UNAM university over the Easter break.
Mexico 20,000 teachers protest to demand salary increases and prompt payment of salaries.
Mexico 3000 police officers march to protest the failure of the government to pay them a bonus and to demand an end to corruption.
Mexico Around 50 gunmen execute 24 people.  Motive is ascribed to a family feud.
Mexico More than 8000 people march in a gay pride parade and demand equal rights.
Mexico More than 100 employees of the transportation ministry strike to protest their transfers to other jobs.  Clashes erupt with police.
Mexico Protesters charge a mayor with abuse of power, nepotism, and sexual harassment, forcing him to quit and flee the town.
Mexico Hundreds of police march to protest the detention of four colleagues who shot and killed a thief during a gun battle.
Mexico Thousands march to commemorate the 32nd anniversary of the day a security battalion opened fire on student protesters.
Mexico Workers hold a rally to protest a recent recommendation by the national antitrust watchdog that the state owned airline Cintra be split up and privatized.
Mexico Riots erupt in the Tepito neighborhood after a police raid seizes seven trucks loaded with stolen merchandise. Angry shopkeepers and residents clash with police, and looters take over the streets that night.
Mexico Auxiliary police upset at not receiving a bonus block streets in the capital and fire their guns, clash with regular police.
Mexico A demonstration was held against Mayor Cuauhtemoc Cardenas.
Mexico A group of Canadian and American peace activists stage a hunger strike in favor of the Zapatistas.
Mexico About 500 Indians take over a town hall to demand that the mayor step down. The conflict stems from a dispute between PRI and PRD supporters.
Mexico Thousands protest to demand the peaceful, legal resolution of an election dispute in Tabasco state.
Mexico The EZLN stages a protest and marches from San Cristobal to Mexico City to lobby for an Indian rights bill.  The march is led by Subcommandante Marcos himself.
Mexico The EZLN stages a protest and marches from San Cristobal to Mexico City to lobby for an Indian rights bill.  The march is led by Subcommandante Marcos himself.
Mexico The EZLN stages a protest and marches from San Cristobal to Mexico City to lobby for an Indian rights bill.  The march is led by Subcommandante Marcos himself.
Mexico The EZLN stages a protest and marches from San Cristobal to Mexico City to lobby for an Indian rights bill.  The march is led by Subcommandante Marcos himself.
Mexico 1500 ranchers and small land owners march to protest land seizures by the Zapatistas.
Mexico Farmers and ranchers, backed by Lacandon Indians, protest to demand that Congress modify an Indian rights bill advocated as a peace measure with the Zapatistas. Protesters demand the return of land seized by rebels.
Mexico Teachers strike and protest nationwide for higher salaries.
Mexico Mayors representing all three of the major political parties gather with thousands of residents to protest an Indian Rights bill, which they say is inadequate.
Guatemala The mayor of Jalapa is assassinated a week ahead of elections.
Mexico Gunmen assassinate the mayor of a small town.
Mexico Thousands of farmers protest government farming policies, which has depressed coffee, sugar, and grain prices.
Mexico A few dozen protesters gather outside a meeting of WTO trade ministers.
Mexico The Collective Front of Anarchist Vegetarians demonstrated against McDonald's. Police make arrests.
Cuba An anti-government demonstration escalated to anti-government violence.
Mexico Machete wielding farmers organized by the PRD march through the city streets to protest the expropriation of their land for a new international airport.
Mexico 40,000 teachers strike to demand that President Vicente Fox increase federal funding for education.
Dominican Republic Supporter of Balaguer fatally shot member of Social Democratic Party during a political argument.
Mexico Hundreds of women march to demand that men share domestic chores.
Mexico Zapatista activists staged a protest. Indian peasants build roadblocks in several areas.  Mexican army and police retake the area the next day.
Mexico Zapatista activists staged a protest. Indian peasants build roadblocks in several areas.  Mexican army and police retake the area the next day.
Mexico About 100,000 municipal workers, half of Mexico City's municipal work force, walk off their jobs to protest the firing of three workers and the loss of benefits, including allowances to buy work clothes.
Mexico Members of the SITRASE truckers union blockade the site of new airport construction with their big rigs.  The incident grows out of an ongoing dispute between two unions, SITRASE and the Mexican Confederation of Workers, over jobs at the site.
Mexico 600 pig farmers block an international bridge on the US border to demand that the government offer them the same subsidies that US farmers receive.
Mexico Between 150 and 250 thugs enter a Ford factory, firing guns and beating workers. The rank and file are disgruntled over closed negotiations between the union and Ford.
Mexico Farmers and their sympathizers protest the expropriation of land to build an international airport; clash with police in Santa Catarina.  After the riot is pacified, another group of farmers seize hostages in San Salvador Atenco.
Mexico Farmers and their sympathizers protest the expropriation of land to build an international airport; clash with police in Santa Catarina.  After the riot is pacified, another group of farmers seize hostages in San Salvador Atenco.
Mexico Independent unions staged a demonstration and rioting occurred.
Mexico An attacker on a motorcycle shoots and kills indigenous leader and anti-mining activist Mariano Abarca.
Mexico 15,000 Mayans protest against the government's infrastructure development plan.
Honduras Soccer fans riot after Mexico beats Honduras 4-1 in a World Cup qualifier.
Mexico 2000 Zapatista supporters wearing ski masks march through the streets, demanding that a government agent they claim killed a Zapatista leader be handed over to them.
Haiti Protesters were demonstrating against corruption and calling for the resignation of current President Michel Martelly while supporting former president Jean-Bertrand Aristide. 
Mexico Thousands demonstrate on Columbus Day against racial discrimination.
Haiti Protesters want the President and Prime Minister to step down and for the government to hold new elections, which have been delayed for three years. 
Haiti Protesters were calling for the President's and Vice-President's resignation because of three-year election delays. 
Haiti Protesters were demonstrating against the president, saying he allowed elections to pass without calling new ones. 
Haiti Two issues were being protested at this demonstration: rioters continue to call for Martelly's removal and some also accused the United Nations of introducing cholera to Haiti. 
Mexico About 100 angry farmers block a US border bridge and dozens more demonstrate in Mexico City against the lifting of tariffs on agricultural products stipulated by NAFTA.
Mexico About 100 angry farmers block a US border bridge and dozens more demonstrate in Mexico City against the lifting of tariffs on agricultural products stipulated by NAFTA.
Guatemala A violent highway robbery occurs -- a gunman shoots and wound an American missionary couple.
Mexico A group of 300 farmers, anarchists, and students rip apart voting booths in municipal elections.
Mexico Cerezo was the editor of a newspaper that published articles about drug trafficking and corruption. Protests occurred after the murder because of the high number (11 deaths) of unreported journalist deaths in the region. There are no dates or regions provided for the protests .
Mexico Hundreds of teaching students from 15 colleges demonstrate in Amalcingo.  A small group of students storm the Morelos state legislature and hold deputies hostage for 15 hours.
Mexico Hundreds of teaching students from 15 colleges demonstrate in Amalcingo.  A small group of students storm the Morelos state legislature and hold deputies hostage for 15 hours.
Guatemala A lone kidnapper abducts two Mormon missionaries for 7.5 hours.  The kidnapper is arrested.
Guatemala Men with automatic weapons hijack a bus full of Mormon tourists from the US.  The men rob the bus, killing one of the tourists.
Jamaica Group of youths gang raped mother of gang leader, several later shot dead.
Mexico Hundreds of firefighters strike after contract negotiations break down.
Mexico Unknown assailants open fire on a municipal jail.
Mexico Dozens of residents of a mountainside community scuffle with police after walking out of talks aimed at ending a land dispute with residents of Santo Tomas Ajusco.
Mexico Hundreds of demonstrators close down a bridge on the border to protest WTO talks in Cancun.
Mexico Several thousand students and political activists march to mark the 35th anniversary of the student massacre in 1968.
Mexico A group closely related to the PRI organizes a protest against the government's plan to open the energy sector to private investment.
Honduras Dozens of journalists protest after one their colleagues is murdered.
Mexico 80,000 union members, left wing activists, and farmers march to protest plans to raise taxes on food, medicine, and to sell state-owned assets.
Mexico Carmen Aristegui, a popular political radio host, was fired for ousting the president's wife for buying a very expensive home and starting the controversial, Mexican version of WikiLeaks.  Protesters were demonstrating against the firing. 
Mexico No reason was provided for the murders. 
Mexico Wives and relatives of some of Mexico's criminals and suspects hold a protest to demand better prison conditions.
Mexico Braceros demonstrated against the government.
Mexico Jane Fonda, Sally Field, and Christine Lahti lead a march, urging the government to provide sufficient resources to help investigate the killing of hundreds of women in the last decade.
Mexico 50,000 supporters of Mexico City mayor Obrador protest against government officials accusing him of corruption.
Dominican Republic Drug agent and 2 others kidnapped suspected trafficker and demanded ransom.
Mexico Hundreds of applicants rejected from National Autonomous University stage a building occupation.
Mexico Radical students and their supporters burst into the offices of the university disciplinary board and steal student records in an effort to avoid expulsion.  After the attack, about 50 other people block traffic to demonstrate.
Mexico Poor farmers seize a union building to express discontent with new economic reforms.
Mexico Hundreds of protesters march to show support for the Cuban government, one week after President Vicente Fox tells the Cuban ambassador to leave Mexico. They decry the government and condemn the US.
El Salvador Police use tear gas to disperse a demonstration by earthquake victims angered by a lack of aid.
Mexico Dairy farmers, with cows in tow, protest in front of the US Embassy to call upon the Mexican government to subsidize the production of milk.
Mexico Six Basques accused of belonging to the ETA stage a hunger strike to protest an order for their extradition to Spain.
El Salvador Demonstrators briefly interrupt a session of the legislature to protest CAFTA.
Mexico Thousands of union workers protest reforms to the country's social security system.
Mexico Some 3000 protesters march through downtown and past the US embassy to mark the 51st anniversary of the July 26 uprising in Cuba.
Mexico Police attempting to evict 200 squatters from a plot of land are greeted with gunfire, sticks, and stones.
Haiti Armed gunmen attacked Haiti's national prison, killing one guard in a shootout and sparking a riot in which 500 prisoners escaped in an attempt to release drug traffickers.
Jamaica 2000 workers at water utility went on strike to demand higher wages, leaving much of the island without water.
Mexico Mexico City's leftist mayor leads about 200,000 protesters in a march to protest efforts to impeach him and uses the event to unveil his 2006 presidential platform.
Mexico Thousands of students, union leaders, and activists march to commemorate the anniversary of the 1968 student massacre.  Police clash with a group of anarchists before the protest begins.
Mexico Dozens of cowboy-hatted farmers protest outside Nestle offices, saying current trade policies hurt Mexican coffee growers.
Mexico Violence occurs between police and citizens attending a PRD election rally.
Mexico Mexicans who worked in the US during a World War II guest worker program, and their heirs, protest to demand restitution of pension funds.
Haiti 2,500 demonstrators massed at the Port-au-Prince airport to protest a trade and diplomatic embargo the OAS put on Haiti.
Mexico Hundreds of thousands of PRD supporters march to protest the prosecution of Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador.
Mexico Hundreds of teachers take to the streets during negotiations with the government over salary increases.
Mexico About 200 members of a religious group walk to the presidential residence to demand that the government reinstate the sect's registration, allowing it to raise money and own property.
Mexico Hundreds protest a controversial remodeling project that is blamed for weakening the roots of historic India Laurel trees.
Mexico More than 10,000 sugarcane growers march to protest plans by the president to veto a sugarcane bill passed by the Congress.
Mexico Thousands of sugar workers strike and take over mills throughout Mexico's 15 sugar-producing states in order to protest the federal government's opposition to a new production law.
Mexico Miners strike for better working conditions and to show support for a union leader accused of responding poorly to a mining tragedy.
Haiti Aristide supporters attacked opposition protesters; each side threw rocks at each other and one person was injured and five people were detained.
Haiti A small group of pro-government demonstrators and politicians was chased away from the streets by rock and bottle-throwing opposition supporters, injuring seven people.
Mexico Hundreds of machete wielding farmers stage a two day blockade of a pumping plant to protest government plans for a dam on a waterway.
Haiti About 100 Aristide supporters demonstrated outside the U.S. embassy to denounce what they called OAS meddling in Haitian affairs.
Mexico A leader of the OCSS is shot several times by three assailants with assault rifles.
Mexico More than 100 people blockade a highway to protest police brutality at a recent riot.
Mexico Teachers strike, demanding pay increases from the state government.  They clash with police in a series of violent riots.  Other protesters, including a mix of unionists and leftists, accuse the governor of rigging state elections.
Mexico Thousands of people, led by the leader of the Zapatistas, take to the streets to claim that the elections that are underway do not offer a real solution to the country's problems.
Mexico Thousands of Lopez Obrador supporters gather to protest announcements declaring Felipe Calderon the winner of the recent election.
Mexico More than 200,000 supporters of leftist presidential candidate Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador protest his defeat in the election.
Mexico Lopez Obrador supporters gather outside each of Mexico's 300 electoral districts and begin marches on the capital in order to demand a ballot-by-ballot recount after the recent election.  The protesters gather in the capital. 
Haiti No reason was provided for the murder. There were allusions to drugs, but nothing definitive. 
Haiti Two gunmen, accused of being members of army-backed gangs, dragged Haitian citizen Orilia Joseph out of her home, beating her as they tugged her down the crowded street; part of her remains are found the next day.
Mexico 500,000 supporters of leftist presidential candidate Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador march to demand a vote-by-vote recount of the recent election.  Protesters camp in the central square for weeks.  Some protesters stage violent riots.
Honduras Rival prison gangs battle with grenades, guns, and knives smuggled into the El Porvenir prison.  Mara 18 tries to take over the prison in response to a weapon's raid by authorities, prompting violence from the other inmates.
Mexico Student PRI supporters seize control of a building at the Hermanos Escobar Agricultural College. PAN and PRD students march on the building and the situation escalates to rioting.  Police respond by storming the college.
Mexico Lopez Obrador supporters protested against the government after the courts ruled that Felipe Calderon was the winner of the election.
Nicaragua Students protest a proposed budget cut at the university.
Mexico More than 5000 demonstrators march through Mexico City to commemorate the 1968 massacre of protesters.
Haiti About 1,000 Aristide supporters broke into the headquarters of the Patriotic Action Committee, injuring four people and sacking the building.
Mexico The PRD organizes a protest against the governor of Oaxaca, accusing him of rigging the 2004 election and demanding the withdrawal of federal police.
Mexico About 300 Mazahua Indians briefly take over a water treatment plant to demand more government development aid.
Mexico Tens of thousands of trade unionists, farmers, and leftist groups march to protest price increases for basic foods like tortillas.
Haiti Dozens of young men burned tires and threw rocks at peacekeepers, accusing them of standing by while Haitian police shot and killed two men.
Mexico Labor unions march to demand the release of protest leaders jailed during last year's anti-government riots.  Leftist sympathizers seize government offices.
Mexico 15 masked gunmen kill four members of a peasant family and then steal their mule and other possessions.
Mexico Thousands of teachers and leftist activists march to mark the first anniversary of a clash between police and striking teachers.
Mexico Miners across Mexico stage a 24 hour strike, hoping to achieve better safety standards and to improve labor's footing in the industry.
Mexico Fishermen in Salina Cruz block the entrance to a refinery to protest against environmental damage.
Mexico A teacher's union demonstrates against proposed changes to the government pension system, briefly closing down the international border.
Mexico Hundreds of leftist activists march to demand the government provide information on the whereabouts of two members of a rebel group who went missing in May.
Mexico Dozens of leftist protesters seize control of a Cathedral to demand that the government increase security in Mexico City.
Mexico 25,000 miners stage a one day strike to protest the police presence at the Cananea copper mine.
Jamaica Crew of Panamanian cargo ship on hunger strike to protest law firms preventing their departure.
Mexico Tens of thousands of farmers protest against NAFTA and demand the government renegotiate the treaty.
Haiti A gunman identified as a soldier jumped from a truck and killed a political activist outside a house where the victim was attending a friend's wake.
Mexico Thousands of white-clad demonstrators protest against government plans for a partial privatization of the state-owned oil company.
Mexico Villagers take over the entrance to some ruins, protesting excessive entrance fees and a lack of investment in the area.  In October, police attempt to remove the villagers, triggering a violent riot.
Mexico The leader of a farmer's group sets himself on fire outside the state capitol in order to demand government mediation in a dispute over 620 acres.  The activist dies.
Honduras The president orders a referendum allowing him to seek another term.  Congress, the military, and the Supreme Court call this move illegal and threaten to remove him from office.  Thousands demonstrate, demanding the president leave.
Mexico Tens of thousands of fishermen on both of Mexico's coasts keep their boats in port to protest against rising fuel prices.
Mexico More than 500,000 truck and bus drivers stage a one day strike to press for lower diesel fuel prices.
Mexico Protesters march, claiming that the president is exploiting an outbreak of H1N1 swine flu for political purposes, noting that campaigning for congressional mid-term elections is due to start soon. Clashes occur.
Mexico 400 prison inmates stage a brief hunger strike to demand a fairer distribution of telephone and visiting hours.
Mexico 150,000 people protest against the surprise closure of a state-run power company.
Mexico Thousands of Mexicans rally to show support for Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, charging that the 2006 election was stolen from him.
Mexico Over 1000 people march through Juarez to call for authorities to end the city's bloodshed.
Mexico Rifle carrying prison inmates riot, killing a social worker and wounding others.  They demand to be given armored cars for escape.
Mexico About 20 gunmen attack a prison, freeing 53 prisoners, 27 of whom have ties to the Gulf cartel.
Mexico Two electricians go on a hunger strike for three months to protest the government's shutdown of a power company.
Nicaragua Peasants stage a land invasion, taking over a ranch.
Guatemala A mob contests the re-election of mayor Pablo Escobar and clashes with his supporters.
Mexico Gunmen open fire on the continuing protests in Oaxaca.  Protesters seize the gunmen and hold them hostage.  They are later released to police custody.
Mexico Thousands of protesters march to demonstrate against widespread violence connected to the drug trade.
Guatemala Protesters were demonstrating against Baldetti's involvement in the graft scandal. 
Mexico Tens of thousands of people march to demonstrate against the inability of authorities to end a crime wave.
Haiti A crowd stoned a soldier in Port-au-Prince, and more than 20 people were arrested; it is not known if the soldier was killed.
Haiti Nine soldiers climbed a steep area to investigate young men hiding out after peasants reported seeing them bathing in a river and bamboo sleeping mats drying outside a cave; the rebels started firing at the soldiers and the soldiers retreated.
Mexico More than 20000 teachers and students march and block roads to demand the release of 98 protesters arrested during a clash with police in the prior week.
Mexico 2000 people march to demand the releaseof 70 people held following the violent protests that occurred during the presidential inauguration.
Mexico Thousands of indigenous Zapatista supporters march to commemorate the Dec. 22, 1997 massacre of 45 Zapatistas, and to celebrate the end of the Mayan calendar.
Mexico Thousands of indigenous Zapatista supporters march to commemorate the Dec. 22, 1997 massacre of 45 Zapatistas, and to celebrate the end of the Mayan calendar.
Mexico Thousands of indigenous Zapatista supporters march to commemorate the Dec. 22, 1997 massacre of 45 Zapatistas, and to celebrate the end of the Mayan calendar.
Mexico Thousands of teachers strike to protest against educational reforms.
Mexico Teachers angered over education reforms protest in the streets.  After the protest, dozens run wild, storming the offices of the PRI.  They also attack the PAN, PRD, and Citizen Movement party headquarters.
Mexico 400 people gather to march for justice and to demand an end to attacks on the press.  Many hold up posters suggesting the government had a hand in the recent death of a journalist.  Dozens also protest in Mexico City.
Mexico 400 people gather to march for justice and to demand an end to attacks on the press.  Many hold up posters suggesting the government had a hand in the recent death of a journalist.  Dozens also protest in Mexico City.
Mexico No specific reason was provided for these killings. 
Mexico A leftist presidential candidate leads protests against the president's plan for tax reforms.
Mexico Hundreds of teachers protest education reform and block the main road to the international airport.  Some clash with police.
Mexico Thousands of teachers and students protest against education reform and to honor victims of a 1968 massacre of protesters.  A small group of self-described anarchists clashes with riot police.
Haiti Aristide supporters staged a counter-demonstration against student protesters.
Haiti Students were going to protest to demand Professor Paquiot's reinstatement as head of Haiti State University and Aristide supporters beat dozens of protesters.
Costa Rica Death Commando storm the Supreme Court and take several of the justices hostage, demanding money for a liver transplant.  Families of the hostages eventually raise money, and the gunmen are flown to Guatemala.
Mexico The parents of the 43 missing students called for the delay of the June 7th elections. 
Mexico Blind protesters were demonstrating against the ban on selling goods at a specific location in the historic center of Mexico City. 
Guatemala An angry mob burns to death two people for allegedly stealing children.  The mob then tries to attack municipal buildings, including the police station and the town hall.
Haiti Surrounded by a crowd of about 200 people, vigilantes stoned and beat a suspected robber and cut off his left hand.
Mexico Protesters were remembering the 47th anniversary of a student massacre in which students wanted an end to repression and civil society groups. The government claims 40 students died in 1968, but this is a contested number. 
Mexico Protesters were remembering the 47th anniversary of a student massacre in which students wanted an end to repression and civil society groups. The government claims 40 students died in 1968, but this is a contested number. 
Mexico Protesters were demonstrating against the sexual attack and murder of a woman. 
Mexico Radical teachers were protesting the exams they are required to take. 
Mexico More than 1000 motorcyclists drive en masse to the Monument of the Revolution in a protest responding to the death of a television actor run over earlier in the month while riding a motorcycle.
Guatemala Rioting and demonstrations occur, with dissidents decrying the repression of student protests, rising electricity rates, and demanding an end to austerity measures.
Cuba Cubans were welcoming home "The Five" from imprisonment in the United States and showing support for their return.  
Cuba The Federation of Cuban Women held a protest against the Ladies in White dissident group.
Guatemala Protesters demonstrate against Vice President Espina, who has been declared president by the military after Jorge Serrano was deposed.
Guatemala Rural organizations rally Indians at the national palace to demand benefits.
Cuba 33 members of the Ladies in White were detained as they were leaving the group's headquarters to attend Sunday mass.
Guatemala An American lawyer, the wife of a slain rebel leader, stages a hunger strike at the national palace to demand information on her husband.
Guatemala Thousands riot over fare hikes in public transport.
Guatemala Thousands riot over fare hikes in public transport.
Guatemala About 1000 students demonstrate at funeral for a student killed by police in the prior week's protests.
Cuba 31 members of the Ladies in White dissident group were arrested in route to Havana from all over the country.
Cuba A group of more than 150 pro-government protesters massed outside the home of a Ladies in White dissident group member to try to keep opponents of the regime from attending a mass and police detained dozens.
Panama Three Greenpeace activists board a ship carrying nuclear waste bound for reprocessing in Japan.  Police make arrests.
Mexico Two tourists are shot to death by an assailant.
Guatemala A small protest occurs.  The demonstrators decry the amnesty given to rebels as a result of the war settlement.
Costa Rica An armed gang kidnaps two European tourists, setting off a national crisis.  Hostages are released after ransom is paid.
Guatemala 15,000 protesters march to protest the president's economic policies.
Haiti Three men from the National Front for Change and Democracy assaulted candidate Gerda Colas.
Guatemala Up to 100,000 people march to memorialize the murdered bishop Juan Gerardi and to demand justice from the government.
Guatemala Violent protests occur.  Students protest against high bus fares.  Police use tear gas and water cannons, and a private security guard shoots a press photographer.  3 others die during the unrest.
Guatemala Protesters gather around the country to demand government help for poverty stricken farmers and to demand rights for indigenous peoples.  Unidentified gunmen open fire on one gathering, killing a protester.  Protesters riot. 
Mexico A popular TV show host linked to drug traffickers is gunned down in a brazen day-time attack on a highway.
Haiti Aristide supporters clashed with UN peacekeepers as the former president faces arrest for not appearing before a court after receiving a summons. 
Mexico 1000 student supporters of the UNAM student strike protest on the one year anniversary of the police raid that ended that event. Protesters, including some members of the strike, detain 33 staff and faculty.
Guatemala Protesters demonstrate against a proposal to increase sales taxes and to add taxes on some businesses, with protesters accuse the US of pressuring Guatemala to approve the taxes. Protests escalate to riots and clashes and police repress. 
Guatemala Nine students begin a hunger strike at the supreme court to protest a tax increase.
Guatemala 53 air traffic controllers strike for higher wages.
Guatemala Hundreds demand punishment for those responsible for massacres during the civil war.
Guatemala Protesters call for the resignation of the president and vice-president.
Guatemala Ex-paramilitaries block roads, demanding payment from the government for their services during the civil war.
Guatemala Unionists and students protest against a plan to pay-off civil war paramilitaries.
Guatemala Ex-paramilitaries block roads, demanding payment from the government for their services during the civil war.  Police break up the road blocks with tear gas.
Cuba More than 100,000 protesters waved small Cuban flags and marched past the Czech Embassy in a government-organized protest of a Czech-sponsored censure of the island by the U.N. Human Rights Commission.
Cuba A government-organized protest was held againt the United States.
Guatemala Teachers strike for higher wages.  They stage frequent marches and occupations, even seizing an oil pumping station.
Guatemala Former paramilitaries protest to demand compensation for their participation in the war; they stage marches and seize control of an oil pumping station owned by French oil company Perenco.
Guatemala Former paramilitaries protest to demand compensation for their participation in the war; they stage marches and seize control of an oil pumping station owned by French oil company Perenco.
Guatemala Former paramilitaries demand compensation.  They march on Chicacao, burning down the municipal offices and taking hostage the provincial governor in San Francisco Zapotitlan.
Guatemala Former paramilitaries demand compensation.  They march on Chicacao, burning down the municipal offices and taking hostage the provincial governor in San Francisco Zapotitlan.
Guatemala Violent protests erupt in support of former dictator Efrain Rios Montt, after the supreme court suspends his presidential campaign.  Protesters riot, surrounding the court, government offices, and the US embassy and a journalist is shot dead.
Haiti 100 union activists gathered in front of the U.N. office to protest the arrest of 12 union members for allegedly trying to overthrow the government and the protesters demanded that international institutions intervene.
Haiti A few dozen men marched to protest a major U.N. operation aimed at rooting out pro-Aristide gang members.
Haiti Several hundred people held a sit-in outside UN headquarters to demand improvements in public security.
Haiti Dozens of student demonstrators threw stones, broke UN vehicles' windshields, and burned a US flag.
Haiti Hundreds of protesters peacefully marched to demand the withdrawal of U.N. peacekeepers and the peacekeepers threw tear gas canisters to disperse the protesters.
Haiti 100 students protested to demand the withdrawal of peacekeepers and a security guard opened fire injuring two people; protesters chased U.N. police officers and threw rocks and smashed the windshield of a U.N. vehicle.
Haiti About 200 people staged a protest, calling for the withdrawal of UN peacekeepers.
Haiti Thousands of demonstrators threw rocks and bottles at a UN base and set a police station and vehicles ablaze as they went on a rampage, accusing the government of leaving the population to die from a cholera outbreak.
Haiti Thousands of demonstrators threw rocks and bottles at a UN base and set a police station and vehicles ablaze as they went on a rampage, accusing the government of leaving the population to die from a cholera outbreak.
Guatemala About 100 organizations mobilize tens of thousands to strike, block highways, schools and other services to protest plans for a tax hike.
Haiti Thousands of demonstrators threw rocks and bottles at a UN base and set a police station and vehicles ablaze as they went on a rampage, accusing the government of leaving the population to die from a cholera outbreak.
Haiti Thousands of demonstrators threw rocks and bottles at a UN base and set a police station and vehicles ablaze as they went on a rampage, accusing the government of leaving the population to die from a cholera outbreak.
Guatemala Paramilitaries protest outside of Congress to demand compensation for their services during the civil war.
Haiti Thousands of demonstrators threw rocks and bottles at a UN base and set a police station and vehicles ablaze as they went on a rampage, accusing the government of leaving the population to die from a cholera outbreak.
Haiti Several hundred protesters demonstrated in support of an 18-year-old man who says he was sexually assaulted by peacekeepers from Uruguay.
Guatemala Air traffic controllers strike, shutting down air travel in Guatemala.  The government eventually fires the strikers.
Guatemala 8000 teachers, unionists, farmers, leftist politicians, and academics wage massive street protests against the pending Central American Free Trade Agreement.
Guatemala Hundreds of protesters try to break through police and storm the Legislative Palace in an effort to stop the passage of the CAFTA pact.
Guatemala Protesters denouncing CAFTA clash with police in the capital, and stage scattered riots around the country.  Gunfire erupts on a highway in the northeast, leading to the death of one protester.
Guatemala Guatemalans protest against CAFTA.  Simultaneous protests occur in many of the Central American states.
Cuba Hundreds of people, most of them children, demonstrated calling for Elian Gonzalez's return to Cuba.
Cuba Tens of thousands gathered at the historic site of Mangos of Baragua to protest, calling for Elian Gonzalez's return to Cuba.
Cuba 3,000 university students joined President Fidel Castro and Elian Gonzalez's father at a protest calling for his return from the United States.
Cuba About 100,000 chanting, flag-waving government-organized protesters massed in front of the U.S. mission, venting anger at a recent U.N. human rights censure and also at delays in the return of Elian Gonzalez from the United States.
Cuba About 400,000 government-organized demonstrators streamed down a muddy road to a historic sugar refinery to celebrate Elian Gonzalez's reunion with his father.
Cuba Tens of thousands of government supporters rallied to protest Elian Gonzalez's continued stay in the United States.
Cuba About 50,000 government supporters pressed for the return of Elian Gonzalez from the United States.
Cuba About 500,000 women protested Elian Gonzalez's delayed return after Fidel Castro called on them to protest.
Cuba Tens of thousands of school children answered President Castro's call to march outside the U.S. Interests Section to demand the repatriation of 6-year-old Elian Gonzalez and they also protested against the Cuban Adjustment Act.
Cuba More than 300,000 government-organized protesters demonstrated against Elian Gonzalez's extended stay in the United States.
Cuba More than 400,000 protesters demonstrated calling for the return of Elian Gonzalez and celebrating a new US court ruling that paves the way for his homecoming.
Cuba More than a million government-organized protesters demonstrated against the US trade embargo.
Cuba About 300,000 government-organized protesters demonstrated against U.S. immigration policy.
Cuba A government-organized protest was held against the U.S.
Guatemala 40,000 protesters show their support for the government during a political crisis in which the president is accused of murder.
Cuba Castro called 20,000 people to demonstrate against President Bush's expected speech on Cuba.
Cuba A protest against the release of an anti-Castro exile wanted in the 1976 bombing of a Cuban airliner, similar protests were also held throughout the country with hundreds of thousands of people.
Guatemala Thousands of indigenous farmers stage an eight day march to the capital from northern Guatemala to protest government back land seizures.
Cuba A protest against the release of an anti-Castro exile wanted in the 1976 bombing of a Cuban airliner, similar protests were also held throughout the country with hundreds of thousands of people.
Cuba A protest against the release of an anti-Castro exile wanted in the 1976 bombing of a Cuban airliner, similar protests were also held throughout the country with hundreds of thousands of people.
Guatemala Thousands of indigenous protesters protest against the killing of protesters by security forces in an earlier protest.
Haiti Outside army headquarters, hundreds of people, some wearing T-shirts declaring ''No To Intervention,'' urged army chief Lt. Gen. Raoul Cedras to hold firm and pleaded with the United States to avoid a military invasion.
Guatemala Opponents of a Canadian-owned gold and silver mine project seize 23 police officers and hold them hostage.  Security forces move in, resulting in a clash in which one officer is shot dead.  Riots spread into nearby towns.
Guatemala Opponents of a Canadian-owned gold and silver mine project seize 23 police officers and hold them hostage.  Security forces move in, resulting in a clash in which one officer is shot dead.  Riots spread into nearby towns.
Guatemala Several dozen people protest outside a prison against the genocide conviction of former dictator Efrain Rios Montt.
Guatemala Indigenous peoples were protesting the decision to deny that genocide occurred. 
Mexico 1000 people protest in front of the US embassy to protest against plans to build a nuclear waste facility in Texas.
Mexico Thousands protest plans to build a nuclear waste facility in Texas, only a few miles from the border.
Mexico Protesters gather to protest the deaths of immigrants trying to cross the US border.
Mexico About two dozen people protest outside the US embassy to demonstrate against US Navy bombing of Vieques Island.
Mexico Hundreds of Mexican truckers block bridges into the United States for three days in protest of US refusals to allow some Mexican drivers into the country.
Mexico 25 groups organize tens of thousands of farmers to protest against NAFTA, demanding greater protection from US imports and more government aid.
Mexico Two dozen demonstrators protest against US corporation setting up operations in Mexico.
Mexico About 200 people form local political parties, small vendor cooperatives, and INGOs hold anti-war protests in front of the US Embassy.
Mexico Over 10,000 protesters demonstrate against US plans to attack Iraq.
Mexico About 500 radical student and activist groups hurl paint bombs at the Mexican stock exchange and the US embassy, protesting the war in Iraq.  Others join the protest to call for affordable housing.
Guatemala Protesters were demonstrating against the elections that they perceived to be illegal.  
Guatemala Protesters were demonstrating against the elections that they perceived to be illegal, but there was a marked difference in participation on election day versus the weekend before. 
Mexico The mayor of a Mexican city on the border leads about 400 people on a 55 mile march to protest US plans for a new border fence.
Honduras Three snipers belonging to a leftist group open fire on a bus carrying 28 US airmen.
Honduras Trade unionists protest in four Honduran cities against the country's reliance on US monetary aid and the growing influence of the IMF.
Panama Anti-imperialist groups take to the streets to protest on the six-month anniversary the US invasion that helped install President Endara.
Panama Hundreds of protesters riot prior to and during a visit by US President Bush.  A speech by Bush is disrupted by protesters opposed to the invasion and tear gas wielding police, forcing Presidents Bush and Endara to flee to safety.
Panama 7000 protesters march to protest the US invasion that toppled Manuel Noriega and brought President Endara to power.
Honduras Demonstrators protest the government's policies outside a summit meeting of Central American leaders.  They try to gain entrance to the summit, and police open fire.
Haiti Three armed men fired shots at a school dance; the gunmen, meanwhile, drove to the other side of a nearby plaza and opened fire in front of a cinema, killing one person.
Honduras Public health workers strike and riot for higher wages.  Event ends when the army removes the striking workers from the hospitals.
Honduras Two indigenous persons imprisoned for destroying a statue of Christopher Columbus on 10/12/1997 stage a hunger strike.
Mexico Three gunmen open fire at a children's party.
Honduras Indians protest on Columbus Day against a decision to strike down a law that bans foreigners from buying land along Honduras' borders and coasts. Many Indians live in these areas and fear being driven out by foreign investors.
Honduras A strike occurs over plans by the government to privatize state-owned businesses.
Honduras Protesters of the Chorti tribe block the entrances to a tourist site, demanding that the government give them land to farm.  Police forcibly remove them.
Honduras School teachers strike to demand the government pay their salaries and increase wages.
Mexico Six bodies are discovered stuffed in plastic bags.
Mexico Five bodies are discovered dumped on a street.
Honduras 80,000 teachers strike for higher wages.
Honduras 58,000 teachers strike for higher wages.
Honduras Coffee growers protest to demand government farm aid.  When police arrive to clear roadblocks, a riot erupts.
Honduras Teachers and nurses strike for higher wages.
Honduras Riots and clashes with police erupt over an upcoming deal with the IMF.
Honduras Left leaning parties lead protests against IMF austerity measures.
Honduras Gunmen murder a friar and steal Christmas bonuses from a home for the elderly.
Honduras Hundreds gather on the one year anniversary of the invasion of Iraq to protest the war and Honduras' participation in it.
Honduras More than 100 employees and executives of Honduras' El Heraldo newspaper demonstrated outside a courtroom to protest the trial on defamation charges of one of their colleagues.
Honduras Indigenous peoples block a road to protest the deforestation of their communities.
Honduras Thousands of teachers strike for higher salaries.
Honduras Doctors and nurses strike at public hospitals for higher wages.
Honduras Indigenous protesters take over a tourist site to pressure the government to honor a 1997 deal to disperse land to the Indians.
Honduras Environmentalists protest laws that allow foreign investment in Honduran mines; they argue that foreign capital destroys the environment.
Honduras Armed protesters clash with police, demanding that the government build more schools, health clinics and provide other services in the area.
Honduras An armed mob attacks a home as part of a long running land dispute.
Honduras Pro-Zelaya protesters violently denounce the military coup; anti-Zelaya protesters demonstrate.
Honduras Pro-Zelaya protesters flock to a border crossing to support Manuel Zelaya's bid to reclaim the presidency.  There, they clash with police.
Honduras Public health workers strike to demand the return of president Zelaya.
Honduras Baton-wielding police fire tear gas to chase thousands of demonstrators away from the Brazilian embassy, where the deposed president is holed up.  The demonstrations continue for days, and two are killed by police.
Honduras A small protest in favor of Manual Zelaya occurs.
Honduras Over 100 protesters gather in the hotel where crisis negations are underway between supporters of Zelaya and supporters of the coup.
Honduras Police fire tear gas and water at pro-Zelaya demonstrators who are protesting post-coup elections.
Honduras Police fire tear gas and water at pro-Zelaya demonstrators who are protesting post-coup elections.
Nicaragua Scattered riots erupt the day after an election.
Honduras Thousands of pro-Zelaya protesters take the streets for the first time since Honduras' new, post-coup president was inaugurated.
Honduras Protesters mark the one year anniversary of the coup.
Honduras Men armed with assault rifles burst into a shoe factory and open fire.  The massacre is blamed on gang rivalry over territory and drug trading.
Honduras Pro-Zelaya protesters call for the ousted president's return and a 15pct wage hike.
Honduras Pro-Zelaya protesters and teachers strike, demanding Zelaya's return and protesting a law decentralizing education.  Zelaya had promised the teachers a pay-raise, but that was canceled after the coup.  Violent riots occur on the 16th.
Honduras A group of Indians march in front of the US embassy to protest the execution of a man in Arizona, and demanding the withdrawal of US troops from Honduras.
Honduras Over 100 Hondurans and 6 Americans protest in front of the US embassy, demanding help in the search for the remains of a US priest killed 15 years earlier in a battle between army forces and leftist guerillas.
Honduras Security forces use tear gas to break up a demonstration involving some 100 journalists protesting the murder of 17 colleagues in the past two years, and demanding justice from the government.
Honduras Farming activists occupy land they claim they have the rights to under a government reform program.  Police arrive and arrest the activists.
Guatemala Business leaders joined the ongoing protests calling for the Vice President to step down due to the customs corruption scandal. 
Honduras About 1800 police officers strike for higher pay and better working conditions.  They block several streets with their patrol cars.
Honduras 800 people demonstrate in support of a leftist presidential candidate who claims to have won a recent election.  Police respond by beating protesters and using tear gas.
Honduras More than 5000 people led by a leftist presidential candidate and her husband, a former president overthrown by a military coup, march to support an opposition presidential candidate.
Mexico Tens of thousands of government employees march to criticize government proposals to streamline the Social Security Institute's pension and benefits system.
Mexico Zetas killed 11 people.
El Salvador 500 Salvadorans gather to remember a massacre of Jesuit priests in 1989.
El Salvador Social security workers strike for higher wages, occupy their office buildings, and clash with police.  The police use tear gas.
El Salvador Civil war veterans and government employees demonstrate for higher pensions, land, or credits.  In Santa Ana, they occupy the mayor's office.
El Salvador Civil war veterans and government employees demonstrate for higher pensions, land, or credits.  In Santa Ana, they occupy the mayor's office.
El Salvador Doctors strike over the government's issuing of warrants for the arrest of doctors that participated in a strike earlier in the month over a wage dispute.
El Salvador Former paramilitaries blockade roads and bridges to demand compensation from the government.
El Salvador Police fire tear gas into a demonstration of former paramilitaries who are demanding compensation from the government.
El Salvador Teachers strike for higher wages.
El Salvador Teachers strike for higher wages.
El Salvador The country's most powerful labor unions stages partial strikes at government offices to demand higher wages.
El Salvador 11,000 public health doctors strike for higher wages.
El Salvador Social security workers strike to protest government plans to privatize health care services.
El Salvador Hundreds of former paramilitaries protest in front of the presidential palace, threatening to take it over, demanding payment for their war service.
El Salvador Doctors strike over plans to privatize the health care system.
El Salvador Truck drivers block highways to demand that the government pressure oil companies to lower gas prices.
El Salvador Doctors at state hospitals strike to protest privatization.  On 2/20/2003, they riot, storming the social security building.  The doctors are eventually fired.
El Salvador Masked protesters occupy a cathedral to protest a scheme to privatize health care.
El Salvador Students protest the war in Iraq, and their government's support of it.
El Salvador Doctors block roads and hunger strike to be allowed to return their jobs, after having been fired for striking.
El Salvador Masked protesters occupy a cathedral to protest the Iraq War, and to demand that 150 fired doctors be returned to their jobs.
El Salvador Demonstrators stage a May Day protest against the Iraq War and the CAFTA agreement.
El Salvador Dozens of street vendors protest against plans by the government to confiscate pirated music and movies.
El Salvador Vendors of pirated CDs and DVDs are joined by students in a protest against CAFTA.
El Salvador Veterans protested their lack of pensions and other benefits.
Nicaragua Labor related unrest.  Sugar workers leave a pro-Sandinista union and join the Nicaraguan Workers Union.  Workers attempt to march on Managua, but are stopped by the Sandinista controlled police.
Nicaragua A militant, pro-Sandinista public employee's union strikes for higher wages.   The strike ends with a doubling of salaries and promises by the government not to fire the strikers.
Nicaragua Leaders of a public sector union strike to protest firings and demand a say in national economic policy.  Rioting and battles with police erupt; the government calls out the army.  The two factions eventually agree to a settlement.
Nicaragua 200 war victims lock themselves inside the national TV stations in a dispute over pension demands.
Nicaragua Public transport workers strike over plans to privatize the buses.
Nicaragua Pro-Sandinista labor unionists demonstrate at national reconciliation talks designed to find an economic consensus among the nation's factions.
Nicaragua Former Contra rebels attack a Sandinista police post.
Nicaragua Contras continue to make demands on the government, demanding promised land and the resignation of Sandinista officials; Contras attack a police post and battle the Sandinista army.
Nicaragua Telecom workers loyal to the Sandinistas strike for higher wages.
Nicaragua About 40 Contras and other townsfolk loot a government warehouse of weapons, food, and other goods.  They then go on a rampage of looting.
Nicaragua About 40 Contras and other townsfolk loot a government warehouse of weapons, food, and other goods.  They then go on a rampage of looting.
Nicaragua Small groups of ex-Contras hold up banks and police posts, stealing money and guns.
Nicaragua Small groups of ex-Contras hold up banks and police posts, stealing money and guns.
Nicaragua Former Contra rebels attack police and seize control of a town, killing 2. 
Nicaragua Sandinistas and Recontras join forces and stage an uprising to demand land and money they were promised in the peace settlement.
Nicaragua Sandinistas and Recontras join forces and stage an uprising to demand land and money they were promised in the peace settlement.
Nicaragua Sandinistas and Recontras join forces to block highways, seize customs posts, and raid public buildings to demand land, jobs, and money.
Nicaragua Thousands of students take to the streets demanding increased government financing for their studies.
Nicaragua 60 Sandinista veterans battle police in front of the presidential palace.  They demand the government give them farms.
Nicaragua 150 to 200 Recontras and former Sandinistas take over Esteli over demands for land, prompting several days of war with military forces.
Nicaragua Students and professors protest budget cuts.  They stage hunger strikes; protests escalate to riots and a professor is killed by police.
Nicaragua Students and professors protest budget cuts.
Nicaragua A nationwide strike occurs; strikers press for land reform.
Nicaragua A former rebel leader stages a hunger strike because he has been banned from participating in presidential elections.
Nicaragua Students storms the central bank to demand increased university budgets.  One is killed by police during the riot.
Nicaragua Ex-contras clash with police over land on the Pan-American Highway.
Nicaragua Armed men open ambush a truck loaded with paving stone and then rob it; they succeed only stealing $4.90.
Nicaragua 2000 public sector doctors strike to get wage negotiations restarted.  In May, they invade a government building, but riot police evict them.
Mexico Citizens were protesting the presence of a questionable vigilante group. 
Guatemala Former paramilitaries invade a village in a land dispute, burning dozens of homes, raping women, and kidnapping children.
Haiti Two days after the incident with rebels on February 3, soldiers arrested a dozen known Aristide sympathizers and torched eight peasants' homes.
Nicaragua Opposition protesters demonstrate against alleged election fraud and call for a new vote.
Mexico About 500 residents of Acapulco march to demand an end to violent crime.
Nicaragua 200 people clash with police over the rising cost of electricity.
Nicaragua Senior citizens protest over pension payouts.  A pro-government mob then appears and attacks the pensioners.
Nicaragua Farmers were protesting against farm owners demanding that they pay medical bills for kidney problems the farmers believe developed because of their work on the farms.
Costa Rica 50,000 teachers strike to protest a new labor law that reduces their pensions.  Hundreds of thousands of protesters are organized by the Civic Committee to support the teachers.
Costa Rica Residents in a poor San Jose neighborhood riot to press demands for drinking water and other public services.  Police use tear gas.
Costa Rica Guaymi Indians held a demonstration targeting the government.
Costa Rica Unionists strike and riot in protest over a government plan to privatize the state electrical company.
Costa Rica Unionists strike and riot in protest over a government plan to privatize the state electrical company.
Costa Rica Unionists strike and riot in protest over a government plan to privatize the state electrical company.
Haiti About 30 people ransacked a voter station after finding their names were not on the registered voter list.
Costa Rica Thousands of unionists and farmers protest against CAFTA, and the government's participation in it.
Costa Rica Thousands demonstrate in favor of the CAFTA agreement.
Costa Rica Thousands protest against CAFTA.
Mexico About 80 supporters of Lopez Obrador block cash registers and throw around merchandise at several Wal-Mart stores, demanding that the corporation stay out of Mexican politics and also alleging that it exploits workers.
Mexico Demonstrators storm a Wal-Mart, accusing the retailer of selling low-cost goods at the expense of workers, farmers, and public markets.
Panama 30,000 public workers strike for 24 hours to demand job security, easing of austerity, and wage hikes.
Panama Hundreds of jobless riot over unemployment and poverty.  Police use tear gas.
Panama Hundreds of unemployed persons riot, burning down government buildings and stores.
Panama Some 8000 doctors and officials of the Social Security system and 250 postal workers strike for higher wages and cost of living increases owed to them since 1988.
Haiti More than 150 machete-wielding men attacked a World Food Program convoy and made off with food.
Panama 13000 taxi and bus drivers strike over plans to break up a 25 year old monopoly in the public transport sector.
Panama 6000 banana workers strike over government plans to sell land owned by Chiriqui Land Company to US-based Chiquita Banana.
Guatemala Protesters march against the World Trade Organization, which is meeting in Mexico.
Mexico Thousands of Indians and Farmers protest outside a meeting of the World Water Forum.  Groups of demonstrators battle with police, smashing patrol cars and hurling rocks.
Panama About 1000 Cuban refugees riot at the Empire Range Complex of refugee camps.  The refugees are angry with the slow pace of resettlement.  236 US soldiers are wounded in the rioting.  The US soldiers specifically avoid taking hostile action.
Panama 7000 unionists stage a general strike over legislative proposals to curb the power of the unions.  Violent demonstrations erupt in the capital.
Panama 7000 unionists stage a general strike over legislative proposals to curb the power of the unions.  Violent demonstrations erupt in the capital.
Panama The Canal Free Zone's business association stages a one-day strike to protest a tax hike; about 2000 businessmen participate.  200 unemployed people gather to support the strike.
Panama Several hundred protesters form a human chain to protest a proposal to allow President Balladares to run for re-election.
Panama About 6000 people attempt to storm the Congress building in a protest against privatization.
Panama Five police officers are injured when a demonstration by 500 students and 150 worker against public transport fare hikes escalates to a riot.
Panama A late night protest against hikes in public transport fees escalates into a riot after police fire tear gas into a crowd of over 10,000 demonstrators.
Panama Strikes and demonstrations occur in protest of a government plant to privatize social security.  Demonstrations turn into violent riots in Panama City.
Panama Thousands demonstrate against negotiations for a free trade agreement between the US and Panama.
Panama Thousands protest any reform in social security law that might lower benefits or raise the minimum retirement age.
Panama High school students and construction workers riot to protest proposals for pension reform.  The riots escalate into general strikes by more than 50 labor unions.  Police make hundreds of arrests.
Panama 60 journalists march to protest a proposed gag law.
Panama Several dozen indigenous Panamanians armed with spears clash with riot police over recent changes to the country's mining law.
Panama Several hundred indigenous Panamanians armed with spears clash with riot police and blockade the Pan-American Highway over recent changes to the country's mining law.
Panama Indigenous Panamanians protest a proposed mining law by blocking the Pan-American Highway, demanding that a mining ban remain in place in their homeland.  Police break up the protests with lethal force.
Panama Hundreds of people lock access to the duty free port to demand greater public investment in the region.
Panama Protesters blocked the highway between Managua and the Panama Canal expansion location because they feared environmental degradation and inadequate compensation for land. 