The civil unrest in San Salvador Atenco of 2006 began on Wednesday, May 3, when police prevented a group of 60 flower vendors from selling at the Texcoco local market in the State of Mxico, about 30 km (19 mi) from Mexico City. Police used violence and arrest against resisters. The flower vendors appealed to the residents of San Salvador Atenco, a small neighboring community about 25 km (16 mi) northeast of Mexico City, famous for their resistance to the development of an airport on their land in 2002. The Atenco residents blocked the highway to Texcoco near their town. In response, hundreds of state police were summoned to remove the blockade, but were unsuccessful after five attempts.
The confrontations were very violent, causing the deaths of two protesters, and dozens of people (mostly women) were sexually assaulted by the police forces.


== National Human Rights Commission report ==
On 16 October 2006, National Human Rights Commission (CNDH) President Jos Luis Soberanes Fernndez published the results of its five-month investigation of the case. The CNDH called the incident a "tragedy", called particular attention to the excessive use of force and firearms by state and federal authorities, and specifically found that:
207 people (including ten minors) were victims of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
145 were arbitrarily arrested.
26 women suffered sexual assault.
5 foreigners, in addition to suffering violence, were illegally expelled from the country.
In connection with these findings, the CNDH submitted recommendations to the federal Secretary of Public Security, Eduardo Medina Mora; the governor of the state of Mxico, Enrique Pea Nieto; and the commissioner of the National Migration Institute, Hiplito Trevio. These included, inter alia, improved training for the security forces, due compensation for the next-of-kin of the two fatalities and for all those whose human rights were violated, and a review of the expulsion procedures applicable to foreign visitors.
The report concluded that the violence could have been prevented through dialogue, but that "preference was given to the use of public force".


=== Police brutality ===
The National Human Rights Commission has charged that police used excessive force, smashing windows and furniture, and hauling people from their beds. The commission is investigating reports that police molested and raped female detainees and abused children, the elderly and the disabled.


== Sources ==
San Salvador Atenco in Mutiny! Infoshop.org
Continuing Struggle Against Violent Repression in San Salvador Atenco, Mexico Cleveland Independent Media Center
Atenco: A Violent Attack Against The Other Campaign Adherents NarcoNews.com
Police Brutality in Atenco, Mexico UpsideDownWorld.org
Police Brutality in Mexico - Znet Zmag.org
Mexico: police storm Atenco World War 4 Report


== References ==

Atenco - Women of Mexican Dissent the New Target http://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/HL0605/S00313.htm


== External links ==
Amnesty International petition to the Attorney General for take the cases officially as a matter of federal jurisdiction
Short Video of violence in San Salvador Atenco
"Atenco: Breaking the Silence" (Video Documentary)
Mexican News Coverage