The 2011 Dohuk riots refers to riots by radical Islamists Kurds on December 2, 2011 which were instigated by Friday prayers' sermons calling for Jihad against stores selling alcohol and massage parlours in Zakho in the Dohuk Governorate, Iraq. The riots soon developed into the looting and burning down of Assyrian and Yazidi-owned properties in other towns in the governorate, causing 4 million dollars in damage.


== Background ==
Assyrian personalities in the region had been wary of the changes of the Arab Spring, particularity the rise of radical Islam. The riots started in Zakho, the northern most town of Iraq, located close to the Turkish border. The town has a Kurdish majority with a sizeable Assyrian and Yezidi minority.


== Friday events ==
The riots were instigated by Friday sermons in the northern city of Zakho after Muslim clerics called for the destruction of stores that sold alcohol in the city on December 2, 2011. Angry youth mobs chanting Allah Akhbar torched and destroyed Assyrian and Yezidi-owned businesses such as stores, hotels, casinos, massage parlours in the northern town of Zakho. The violence spilled into nearby towns of Dohuk and Semel. Many Assyrian social clubs and homes were also attacked throughout the province. Angry pro-government supporters that belonged to the Kurdistan Democratic Party suspected Muslim Brotherhood-inspired Kurdistan Islamic Union (KIU) clerics to be behind the violence and attacked offices of the Islamic party in Dohuk and Erbil overnight. However, in an official statement, the KIU denied any connections to the riots.


== Targets ==
Riots began in Zakho but quickly expanded to Semel, Dohuk and surrounding Assyrian villages.

December 2 Targets:

30 stores that sold alcohol, 4 hotels, 1 massage parlor, a number of hair salons, cafeterias and a Catholic diocese in Zakho.
The Assyrian Nohadra Social Club in Dohuk was attacked by a mob of 200 people, causing damage worth 50,000 dollars
The Yezidi Health Club in Dohuk
The Wan Restaurant in Semel
A bar and a tourist hotel in Zawita that led to the arrest of 32 people.

December 3 Targets:

A group of 100 local Islamists attacked the Assyrian Saint Daniel Church and many Christian homes in Mansouriyah early in the morning. Locals claim young students were instigated by teachers.
Homes in the village of Sheoz

December 4 Targets

Three shops that sold alcohol were set on fire by a mob of 20 in the Assyrian village of Deralok
A store that sold alcohol was shot with an automatic weapon in Dohuk

December 5 Targets

Shops that sold alcohol were burned down by mobs in Koy Sanjaq
Massage parlor burned in Sulaymaniyah
Previously burned shops in Zakho were pasted with flyers threatening to burn down any shop that decides to reopen


== Aftermath ==
On December 3, the Kurdish intelligence agency Asaish arrested 20 KIU members of parliament and high officials within the party. The President of Iraqi Kurdistan Masoud Barzani ordered the formation of a committee to investigate the event. In an official press release, he stated: "I condemn both these unlawful acts. I call on the people of the Kurdistan Region to preserve our traditions of ethnic and religious co-existence. I have ordered the formation of a committee to look into these disturbances and bring to justice those responsible."


== External links ==
Video of the Riots  Burning and destruction of places selling drinks and massage
Video of the Riots 2  Clashes between youths and security forces in Zakho
Video of the Riots 3  Zakho after demonstrations and vandalism


== References ==