Second Intifada - Wikipedia document.documentElement.className = document.documentElement.className.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" ); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgCanonicalNamespace":"","wgCanonicalSpecialPageName":false,"wgNamespaceNumber":0,"wgPageName":"Second_Intifada","wgTitle":"Second Intifada","wgCurRevisionId":742785605,"wgRevisionId":742785605,"wgArticleId":71717,"wgIsArticle":true,"wgIsRedirect":false,"wgAction":"view","wgUserName":null,"wgUserGroups":["*"],"wgCategories":["Articles with Turkish-language external links","Articles with Wayback Machine links","All articles with dead external links","Articles with dead external links from June 2016","CS1 errors: dates","Articles with dead external links from September 2014","CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he)","CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown","Pages with archiveurl citation errors","CS1 uses Arabic-language script (ar)","CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar)","Pages with citations lacking titles","Pages with citations having bare URLs","CS1 uses Hebrew-language script (he)","Wikipedia pages under 30-500 editing restriction","All articles with failed verification","Articles with failed verification from September 2014","Articles containing Arabic-language text","Articles containing Hebrew-language text","All articles with unsourced statements","Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010","Articles with unsourced statements from July 2009","All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases","Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2010","Use dmy dates from May 2016","Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers","Second Intifada","2000s in the Palestinian territories","Intifadas","Riots and civil disorder in Israel","Riots and civil disorder in the Palestinian National Authority","Protests in the Palestinian territories"],"wgBreakFrames":false,"wgPageContentLanguage":"en","wgPageContentModel":"wikitext","wgSeparatorTransformTable":["",""],"wgDigitTransformTable":["",""],"wgDefaultDateFormat":"dmy","wgMonthNames":["","January","February","March","April","May","June","July","August","September","October","November","December"],"wgMonthNamesShort":["","Jan","Feb","Mar","Apr","May","Jun","Jul","Aug","Sep","Oct","Nov","Dec"],"wgRelevantPageName":"Second_Intifada","wgRelevantArticleId":71717,"wgRequestId":"WAoroQpAICkAAE@PU2UAAAAU","wgIsProbablyEditable":false,"wgRestrictionEdit":["extendedconfirmed"],"wgRestrictionMove":["extendedconfirmed"],"wgRedirectedFrom":"Al-Aqsa_Intifada","wgWikiEditorEnabledModules":{"toolbar":true,"dialogs":true,"preview":false,"publish":false},"wgBetaFeaturesFeatures":[],"wgMediaViewerOnClick":true,"wgMediaViewerEnabledByDefault":true,"wgVisualEditor":{"pageLanguageCode":"en","pageLanguageDir":"ltr","usePageImages":true,"usePageDescriptions":true},"wgPreferredVariant":"en","wgMFDisplayWikibaseDescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgRelatedArticles":null,"wgRelatedArticlesUseCirrusSearch":true,"wgRelatedArticlesOnlyUseCirrusSearch":false,"wgULSCurrentAutonym":"English","wgNoticeProject":"wikipedia","wgCentralNoticeCookiesToDelete":[],"wgCentralNoticeCategoriesUsingLegacy":["Fundraising","fundraising"],"wgCategoryTreePageCategoryOptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgFlaggedRevsParams":{"tags":{"status":{"levels":1,"quality":2,"pristine":3}}},"wgStableRevisionId":null,"wgInternalRedirectTargetUrl":"/wiki/Second_Intifada","wgWikibaseItemId":"Q49106","wgCentralAuthMobileDomain":false,"wgVisualEditorToolbarScrollOffset":0,"wgEditSubmitButtonLabelPublish":false});mw.loader.state({"ext.globalCssJs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","user.cssprefs":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"loading","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","ext.timeline.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediaBadges":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonPrint":"ready","mediawiki.sectionAnchor":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.user":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.options@0j3lz3q",function($,jQuery,require,module){mw.user.options.set({"variant":"en"});});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@1dqfd7l",function ( $, jQuery, require, module ) { mw.user.tokens.set({"editToken":"+\\","patrolToken":"+\\","watchToken":"+\\","csrfToken":"+\\"});/*@nomin*/; });mw.loader.load(["mediawiki.action.view.redirect","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.legacy.wikibits","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.init","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","skins.vector.js"]);}); Second Intifada From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from Al-Aqsa Intifada ) Jump to: navigation , search "Al-Aqsa Intifada" redirects here. For the album of this name, see Al-Aqsa Intifada (album) . This article is about the Second Palestinian Intifada. For Second Sahrawi Intifada, see Independence Intifada (Western Sahara) . Second Intifada Part of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 

Israeli soldiers in Nablus, during Operation Defensive Shield Date 28 September 2000 – 8 February 2005 

(4 years, 4 months, 1 week and 4 days) Location Palestinian Authority , Israel Result 

Uprising suppressed [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] Construction of the Israeli West Bank barrier Decrease of violence in the West Bank Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip Belligerents 

Israel Israel Defense Forces Shin Bet Israel Police Israel Border Police Civil Guard Mishmeret Yesha 

Palestinian Authority PLO Preventive Security Force 

Palestinian National Security Forces Fatah ( al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades ) PFLP DFLP Hamas Islamic Jihad Popular Resistance Committees Others 

Supported by; Iraq [1] ( until 2003 ) Commanders and leaders 

Ariel Sharon 

Avi Dichter 

Ehud Barak 

Shaul Mofaz 

Moshe Ya'alon 

Dan Halutz 

Gabi Ashkenazi 

PLO leaders 

Yasser Arafat 

Mahmoud Abbas 

Marwan Barghouti (POW) 

Abu Ali Mustafa (KIA) 

Ahmad Sa'adat (POW) 

Nayef Hawatmeh 

Hamas leaders 

Ahmed Yasin (KIA) 

Abdel Rantissi (KIA) 

Khaled Mashaal 

Ismail Haniyeh 

Mohammed Deif 

Other leaders 

Abd Al Aziz Awda 

Ramadan Shalah 

Jamal Abu Samhadana (KIA) Casualties and losses 

29 September 2000 – 1 January 2005: 945 [8] [ not in citation given ] –1,010 [9] Israelis total: 

- 644–773 Israeli civilians killed by Palestinians; 

- 215–301 Israeli security force personnel killed by Palestinians 

29 September 2000 – 1 January 2005: 3,179 [9] [10] [11] –3,354 [8] Palestinians total: 

- 2,739–3,168 Palestinians killed by Israelis security forces; * 

- 34 Palestinians killed by Israeli civilians; 

- 152–406 Palestinians killed by Palestinians; 

Thousands detained 55 foreign citizens total: 

- 45 foreign citizens killed by Palestinians; 

- 10 foreign citizens killed by Israeli security forces [8] * For the controversial issue of the Palestinian civilian/combatant breakdown, see Casualties . v t e Second Intifada October 2000 events MV Santorini MV Karine A ("Noah's Ark") 

"Defensive Shield" Jenin Bethlehem Nablus "Determined Path" "Rainbow" "Days of Penitence" Lists 

Suicide attacks Rocket attacks list 

The Second Intifada , also known as the Al-Aqsa Intifada ( Arabic : انتفاضة الأقصى ‎‎ Intifāḍat al-ʾAqṣā ; Hebrew : אינתיפאדת אל-אקצה ‎‎ Intifādat El-Aqtzah ), was the second Palestinian uprising against Israel – a period of intensified Israeli-Palestinian violence. It started in September 2000, when Ariel Sharon made a visit to the Temple Mount , seen by Palestinians as highly provocative; and Palestinian demonstrators, throwing stones at police, were dispersed by the Israeli army , using tear gas and rubber bullets . [12] 

Both parties caused high numbers of casualties among civilians as well as combatants: the Palestinians by numerous suicide bombings and gunfire; the Israelis by tank and gunfire and air attacks, by numerous targeted killings , and by reactions to demonstrations. The death toll, including both military and civilian, is estimated to be about 3,000 Palestinians and 1,000 Israelis, as well as 64 foreigners. [13] [14] 

Many consider the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit on 8 February 2005 to be the end of the Second Intifada , when President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime Minister Ariel Sharon agreed that all Palestinians would stop all acts of violence against all Israelis everywhere and, in parallel, that Israel would cease all its military activity against all Palestinians everywhere. They reaffirmed their commitment to the Roadmap for Peace which began at Madrid. However, the violence did not stop in the following years, though suicide bombings decreased significantly. [15] [16] 

Contents 1 Etymology 2 Background 2.1 Oslo Accords 2.2 Camp David Summit 2.3 Continued settlement 3 Timeline 3.1 2000 3.1.1 Sharon visits Temple Mount 3.1.2 First days of the Intifada 3.1.3 October 2000 events 3.1.4 Ramallah lynching and Israeli response 3.1.5 November and December 3.2 2001 3.3 2002 3.4 Jenin 3.5 Bethlehem 3.6 2003 3.7 2004 3.8 2005 3.9 End of the Intifada 4 Cause of the Second Intifada 4.1 The Mitchell Report 5 Views on the Second Intifada 6 Casualties 6.1 Combatant versus noncombatant deaths 6.2 Palestinians killed by Palestinians 7 Aftermath 7.1 Deaths in 2006 8 Tactics 8.1 Palestinians 8.2 Israel 9 International involvement 10 Effects on Oslo Accords 11 Economic costs 11.1 Israel 11.2 Palestinian Authority 12 See also 13 References 14 Bibliography 

Etymology 

Second Intifada refers to a second Palestinian uprising, following the first Palestinian uprising , which occurred between December 1987 and 1993. "Intifada" ( انتفاضة ) translates into English as "uprising." Its root is an Arabic word meaning "the shaking off." It has been used in the meaning of "insurrection" in various Arab countries. The Egyptian riots of 1977 were called the "bread intifada". [17] The term refers to a revolt against the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian Territories. 

Al-Aqsa Intifada refers to the Al-Aqsa Mosque , the place where the intifada started. It is the name of a mosque, constructed in the 8th century CE at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, also known as the Temple Mount in the Old City of Jerusalem , a location considered the holiest site in Judaism and third holiest in Islam. 

The Intifada is sometimes called the Oslo War (מלחמת אוסלו) by some Israelis who consider it to be the result of concessions made by Israel following the Oslo Accords , [18] [19] [20] and Arafat's War , after the late Palestinian leader whom some blamed for starting it. Others have named what they consider disproportionate response to what was initially a popular uprising by unarmed demonstrators as the reason for the escalation of the Intifada into an all out war. [21] Background See also: Palestinian political violence and Israeli-occupied territories Oslo Accords 

Under the Oslo Accords , signed in 1993 and 1995, Israel committed to the phased withdrawal of its forces from parts of the Gaza Strip and West Bank , and affirmed the Palestinian right to self-government within those areas through the creation of a Palestinian Authority . For their part, the Palestine Liberation Organization formally recognised Israel and committed to adopting responsibility for internal security in population centres in the areas evacuated. Palestinian self-rule was to last for a five-year interim period during which a permanent agreement would be negotiated. However, the realities on the ground left both sides deeply disappointed with the Oslo process. Israelis and Palestinians have blamed each other for the failure of the Oslo peace process. In the five years immediately following the signing of the Oslo accords, 405 Palestinians and 256 Israelis were killed, which for the latter represented a casualty count higher than that of the previous fifteen years combined (216, 172 of whom were killed during the First Intifada ). 

From 1996 Israel made extensive contingency plans and preparations, collectively code-named "Musical Charm," in the eventuality that peace talks might fail. In 1998, after concluding that the 5-year plan stipulated in the Oslo Talks would not be completed, the IDF implemented an Operation Field of Thorns plan to conquer towns in Area C, and some areas of Gaza, and military exercises at regimental level were carried out in April 2000 to that end. Palestinian preparations were defensive, and small scale, more to reassure the local population than to cope with an eventual attack from Israel. The intensity of these operations led one Brigadier General, Zvi Fogel to wonder whether Israel's military preparations would not turn out to be a self-fulfilling prophecy. [22] 

In 1995, Shimon Peres took the place of Yitzhak Rabin , who had been assassinated by Yigal Amir , a Jewish extremist opposed to the Oslo peace agreement. In the 1996 elections, Israelis elected a right-wing [23] coalition led by the Likud candidate, Benjamin Netanyahu who was followed in 1999 by the Labor Party leader Ehud Barak . Camp David Summit 

From 11 to 25 July 2000, the Middle East Peace Summit at Camp David was held between United States President Bill Clinton , Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak , and Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser Arafat . The talks ultimately failed with each side blaming the other. There were four principal obstacles to agreement: territory, Jerusalem and the Temple Mount , refugees and the right of return , and Israeli security concerns. Disappointment at the situation over the summer led to a significant fracturing of the PLO as many Fatah factions abandoned it to join Hamas and Islamic Jihad. [24] 

On 13 September 2000, Yasser Arafat and the Palestinian Legislative Council postponed the planned unilateral declaration of an independent Palestinian state. [25] Continued settlement 

While Peres had limited settlement construction at the request of US Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright , [23] Netanyahu continued construction within existing Israeli settlements [26] and put forward plans for the construction of a new neighbourhood, Har Homa , in East Jerusalem . However, he fell far short of the Shamir government's 1991–92 level and refrained from building new settlements, although the Oslo agreements stipulated no such ban. [23] Construction of Housing Units Before Oslo: 1991–92: 13,960, After Oslo: 1994–95: 3,840, 1996–1997: 3,570. [27] 

With the aim of marginalising the settlers' more militant wing, Barak courted moderate settler opinion, securing agreement for the dismantlement of 12 new outposts that had been constructed since the Wye River Agreement of November 1998, [28] but the continued expansion of existing settlements with plans for 3,000 new houses in the West Bank drew strong condemnation from the Palestinian leadership. Though construction within existing settlements was permitted under the Oslo agreements, Palestinian supporters contend that any continued construction was contrary to its spirit, [23] prejudiced the outcome of final status negotiations, and undermined Palestinian confidence in Barak's desire for peace. [28] Timeline 2000 

The Middle East Peace Summit at Camp David from 11 to 25 July 2000, took place between United States President Bill Clinton , Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak , and Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser Arafat . It failed with the latter two blaming each other for the failure of the talks. There were four principal obstacles to agreement: territory, Jerusalem and the Temple Mount , Palestinian refugees and the right of return and Israeli security concerns. Sharon visits Temple Mount 

On 28 September, Israeli opposition leader Ariel Sharon together with a Likud party delegation surrounded by hundreds of Israeli riot police, visited the Temple Mount . Al-Aqsa Mosque is part of the compound and is widely considered the third holiest site in Islam . [29] Israel asserted its control by incorporating East Jerusalem into Jerusalem in 1980, and the compound is the holiest site in Judaism . Sharon was only permitted to enter the compound after the Israeli Interior Minister had received assurances from the Palestinian Authority's security chief that no problems would arise if he made the visit. [30] Sharon did not actually go into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and went during normal tourist hours. Colin Shindler writes, "Shlomo Ben-Ami, the Minister of Internal security, was told by Israeli intelligence that there was no concerted risk of violence. This was implicitly confirmed by Jibril Rajoub, the Palestinian head of Preventive Security on the West Bank, who told Ben-Shlomo that Sharon could visit the Haram, but not enter a mosque on security grounds." [31] 

Shortly after Sharon left the site, angry demonstrations by Palestinian Jerusalemites outside erupted into rioting. The person in charge of the waqf at the time, Abu Qteish, was later indicted by Israel for using a loud-speaker to call on Palestinians to defend Al-Aqsa at the time, which action Israeli authorities claimed was responsible for the subsequent stone-throwing in the direction of the Wailing Wall. [32] Israeli police responded with tear gas and rubber bullets, while protesters hurled stones and other missiles, injuring 25 policemen, of whom one was seriously injured and had to be taken to hospital. At least three Palestinians were wounded by rubber bullets. [33] 

The stated purpose for Sharon's visit of the compound was to assert the right of all Israelis to visit the Temple Mount; [34] [35] however, according to Likud spokesman Ofir Akunis , the purpose was to "show that under a Likud government [the Temple Mount] will remain under Israeli sovereignty." [36] Ehud Barak in the Camp David negotiations had insisted that East Jerusalem, where the Haram was located, would remain under complete Israeli sovereignty. [37] In response to accusations by Ariel Sharon of government readiness to concede the site to the Palestinians, the Israeli government gave Sharon permission to visit the area. When alerted of his intentions, senior Palestinian figures, such as Yasser Arafat , Saeb Erekat , and Faisal Husseini all asked Sharon to call off his visit. [38] 

The Palestinians, some 10 days earlier, had just observed their annual memorial day for the Sabra and Shatila massacre . [38] The Kahan Commission had concluded that Ariel Sharon , who was Defense Minister during the Sabra and Shatila massacre, was found to bear personal responsibility [39] "for ignoring the danger of bloodshed and revenge" and "not taking appropriate measures to prevent bloodshed." Sharon's negligence in protecting the civilian population of Beirut, which had come under Israeli control amounted to a non-fulfillment of a duty with which the Defence Minister was charged , and it was recommended that Sharon be dismissed as Defence Minister. Sharon initially refused to resign, but after the death of an Israeli after a peace march, Sharon did resign as Defense minister, but remained in the Israeli cabinet. 

The Palestinians condemned Sharon's visit to the Temple Mount as a provocation and an incursion, as were his armed bodyguards that arrived on the scene with him. Critics claim that Sharon knew that the visit could trigger violence, and that the purpose of his visit was political. According to one observer, Sharon, in walking on the temple Mount, was "skating on the thinnest ice in the Arab-Israeli conflict." [40] According to Yossef Bodansky , 

Clinton's proposal [...] included explicit guarantees that Jews would have the right to visit and pray in and around the Temple Mount... Once Sharon was convinced that Jews had free access to the Temple Mount, there would be little the Israeli religious and nationalist Right could do to stall the peace process. When Sharon expressed interest in visiting the Temple Mount, Barak ordered GSS chief Ami Ayalon to approach Jibril Rajoub with a special request to facilitate a smooth and friendly visit. [...] Rajoub promised it would be smooth as long as Sharon would refrain from entering any of the mosques or praying publicly. [...] Just to be on the safe side, Barak personally approached Arafat and once again got assurances that Sharon's visit would be smooth as long as he did not attempt to enter the Holy Mosques. [...] A group of Palestinian dignitaries came to protest the visit, as did three Arab Knesset Members. With the dignitaries watching from a safe distance, the Shabab (youth mob) threw rocks and attempted to get past the Israeli security personnel and reach Sharon and his entourage. [...] Still, Sharon's deportment was quiet and dignified. He did not pray, did not make any statement, or do anything else that might be interpreted as offensive to the sensitivities of Muslims. Even after he came back near the Wailing Wall under the hail of rocks, he remained calm. "I came here as one who believes in coexistence between Jews and Arabs," Sharon told the waiting reporters. "I believe that we can build and develop together. This was a peaceful visit. Is it an instigation for Israeli Jews to come to the Jewish people's holiest site?" [41] 

Shlomo Ben-Ami , the then acting Israeli Foreign Minister, has maintained, however, that he received Palestinian assurances that no violence would occur, provided that Ariel Sharon not enter one of the mosques. [42] 

According to The New York Times , many in the Arab world, including Egyptians, Palestinians, Lebanese and Jordanians, point to Sharon's visit as the beginning of the Second Intifada and derailment of the peace process. [43] According to Juliana Ochs, Sharon's visit 'symbolically instigated' the second intifada. [44] First days of the Intifada 

On 29 September 2000, the day after Sharon's visit, following Friday prayers, large riots broke out around the Old City of Jerusalem . After Palestinians on the Temple Mount threw rocks over the Western Wall at Jewish worshippers, Israeli police fired back. The switch to live ammunition occurred when the chief of Jerusalem's police force was knocked unconscious by a rock. [45] Police then switched to live ammunition, killing four Palestinian youths. [46] [47] Up to 200 Palestinians and police were injured. [48] Another three Palestinians were killed in the Old City and on the Mount of Olives . [49] By the end of the day, 7 Palestinians had been killed and 300 had been wounded. [50] 70 Israeli policemen were also injured in the clashes. [38] [51] 

In the days that followed, demonstrations erupted all over the West Bank and Gaza . Israeli police responded with live fire and rubber-coated bullets. In the first five days, at least 47 Palestinians were killed, and 1,885 were wounded. [50] In Paris, as Jacques Chirac attempted to mediate between the parties, he protested to Barak that the ratio of Palestinian and Israeli killed and wounded on one day were such that he could not convince anyone the Palestinians were the aggressors. He also told Barak that "continu(ing) to fire from helicopters on people throwing rocks" and refusing an international inquiry was tantamount to rejecting Arafat's offer to participate in trilateral negotiations. [52] On 27 September, an Israeli soldier was killed and another lightly wounded in a bombing by Palestinian militants near the Gaza Strip settlement of Netzarim . [53] Two days later, Palestinian police officer Nail Suleiman opened fire on an Israel Border Police Jeep during a joint patrol in the West Bank city of Qalqiliyah , killing Supt. Yosef Tabeja. [54] During the first few days of riots, the IDF fired approximately 1.3 million bullets. [55] 

According to Amnesty International the early Palestinian casualties were those taking part in demonstrations or bystanders. Amnesty further states that approximately 80% of the Palestinians killed during the first month were in demonstrations where Israeli security services lives were not in danger. [56] 

On 30 September 2000, the death of Muhammad al-Durrah , a Palestinian boy shot dead while sheltering behind his father in an alley in the Gaza Strip was caught on video. Initially the boy's death and his father's wounding was attributed to Israeli soldiers. The scene assumed iconic status, as it was shown around the world and repeatedly broadcast on Arab television. The Israeli army initially assumed responsibility for the killing and apologised, and only retracted 2 months later, when an internal investigation cast doubt on the original version, and controversy subsequently raged as to whether indeed the IDF had fired the shots or Palestinian factions were responsible for the fatal gunshots. [57] October 2000 events Main article: October 2000 events 

The "October 2000 events" refers to several days of disturbances and clashes inside Israel, mostly between Arab citizens and the Israel police . The events also saw large-scale rioting by both Arabs and Jews. Twelve Arab citizens of Israel and a Palestinian from the Gaza Strip were killed by Israeli police, while an Israeli Jew was killed when his car was hit by a rock on the Tel-Aviv-Haifa freeway . During the first month of the Intifada, 141 Palestinians were killed and 5,984 were wounded while 12 Israelis were killed and 65 wounded. [58] 

A general strike and demonstrations across northern Israel began on 1 October and continued for several days. In some cases, the demonstrations escalated into clashes with the Israeli police involving rock-throwing , firebombing , and live-fire. Policemen used tear-gas and opened fire with rubber-coated bullets and later live ammunition in some instances, many times in contravention of police protocol governing riot-dispersion. This use of live ammunition was directly linked with many of the deaths by the Or Commission . 

On 8 October, thousands of Jewish Israelis participated in violent acts in Tel Aviv and elsewhere, some throwing stones at Arabs, destroying Arab property and chanting "Death to the Arabs." [59] 

Following the riots, a high degree of tension between Jewish and Arab citizens and distrust between the Arab citizens and police were widespread. An investigation committee, headed by Supreme Court Justice Theodor Or , reviewed the violent riots and found that the police were poorly prepared to handle such riots and charged major officers with bad conduct. The Or Commission reprimanded Prime Minister Ehud Barak and recommended Shlomo Ben-Ami , then the Internal Security Minister, not serve again as Minister of Public Security. The committee also blamed Arab leaders and Knesset members for contributing to inflaming the atmosphere and making the violence more severe. Ramallah lynching and Israeli response Main article: 2000 Ramallah lynching 

On 12 October, PA police arrested two Israeli reservists who had accidentally entered Ramallah , where in the preceding weeks a hundred Palestinians had been killed, nearly two dozen of them minors. [60] Rumours quickly spread that Israeli undercover agents were in the building, and an angry crowd of more than 1,000 Palestinian mourners gathered in front of the station calling for their death. Both soldiers were beaten, stabbed, and disembowelled, and one body was set on fire. An Italian television crew captured the killings on video and then broadcast his tape internationally. [61] [62] A British journalist had his camera destroyed by rioters as he attempted to take a picture. The brutality of the killings shocked the Israeli public, who saw it as proof of a deep-seated Palestinian hatred of Israel and Jews. [63] In response, Israel launched a series of retaliatory air-strikes against Palestinian Authority targets in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The police station where the lynching had taken place was evacuated and destroyed in these operations. [64] [65] Israel later tracked down and arrested those responsible for killing the soldiers. November and December 

Clashes between Israeli forces and Palestinians increased sharply on 1 November, when three Israeli soldiers and six Palestinians were killed, and four IDF soldiers and 140 Palestinians were wounded. In subsequent days, casualties increased as the IDF attempted to restore order, with clashes occurring every day in November. A total of 122 Palestinians and 22 Israelis were killed. On 27 November, the first day of Ramadan , Israel eased restrictions on the passage of goods and fuel through the Karni crossing . That same day, the Jerusalem settlement of Gilo came under Palestinian heavy machine gun fire from Beit Jala . Israel tightened restrictions a week later, and Palestinians continued to clash with the IDF and Israeli settlers, with a total of 51 Palestinians and 8 Israelis killed in December. [66] 2001 

The Taba Summit between Israel and the Palestinian Authority was held from 21 to 27 January 2001, at Taba in the Sinai peninsula . Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian President Yasser Arafat came closer to reaching a final settlement than any previous or subsequent peace talks yet ultimately failed to achieve their goals. 

On 17 January 2001, Israeli teenager Ofir Rahum was murdered after being lured into Ramallah by a 24-year-old Palestinian, Mona Jaud Awana, a member of Fatah's Tanzim . She had contacted Ofir on the internet and engaged in an online romance with him for several months. She eventually convinced him to drive to Ramallah to meet her, where he was instead ambushed by three Palestinian gunmen and shot over fifteen times. [67] Awana was later arrested in a massive military and police operation, and imprisoned for life. Five other Israelis were killed in January, along with eighteen Palestinians. 

Ariel Sharon , at the time from the Likud party, ran against Ehud Barak from the Labour party . Sharon was elected Israeli Prime Minister 6 February 2001 in the 2001 special election to the Prime Ministership . Sharon refused to meet in person with Yasser Arafat. 

Violence in March resulted in the deaths of 8 Israelis, mostly civilians, and 26 Palestinians. In Hebron , a Palestinian sniper killed ten-month-old Israeli baby Shalhevet Pass . [68] [69] The murder shocked the Israeli public. According to the Israel police investigation the sniper aimed deliberately at the baby. [70] 

On 30 April 2001, seven Palestinian militants were killed in an explosion, one of them a participant in Ofir Rahum's murder. The IDF refused to confirm or deny Palestinian accusations that it was responsible. 

On 7 May 2001, the IDF naval commandos captured the vessel Santorini , which sailed in international waters towards Palestinian Authority-controlled Gaza. The ship was laden with weaponry. The Israeli investigation that followed alleged that the shipment had been purchased by Ahmed Jibril 's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine - General Command (PFLP-GC). The ship's value and that of its cargo was estimated at $10 million. The crew was reportedly planning to unload the cargo of weapons-filled barrels—carefully sealed and waterproofed along with their contents—at a prearranged location off the Gaza coast, where the Palestinian Authority would recover it. 

On 8 May 2001, two Israeli teenagers, Yaakov "Koby" Mandell (13) and Yosef Ishran (14) were kidnapped while hiking near their village. Their bodies were discovered the next morning in a cave near where they lived. [71] USA Today reported that, according to the police, both boys had "been bound, stabbed and beaten to death with rocks." The newspaper continued, "The walls of the cave in the Judean Desert were covered with the boys' blood, reportedly smeared there by the killers." [72] 

On 18 May 2001, Israel for the first time since 1967 used warplanes to attack targets in the territories. In the past, airstrikes had been carried out with helicopter gunships. 12 Palestinians were killed in these attacks on Palestinian Authority security targets. 

On 1 June 2001, an Islamic Jihad suicide bomber detonated himself in the Tel Aviv coastline Dolphinarium dancing club. Twenty-one Israeli civilians, most of them high school students, were killed and 132 injured. [73] [74] [75] [76] The attack significantly hampered American attempts to negotiate cease-fire. 

A total of 469 Palestinians and 199 Israelis were killed in 2001. Amnesty International's report on the first year of the Intifada states: "The overwhelming majority of cases of unlawful killings and injuries in Israel and the Occupied Territories have been committed by the IDF using excessive force. In particular, the IDF have used US-supplied helicopters in punitive rocket attacks where there was no imminent danger to life. Israel has also used helicopter gunships to carry out extrajudicial executions and to fire at targets that resulted in the killing of civilians, including children.... Hamas and Islamic Jihad have frequently placed bombs in public places, usually within Israel, in order to kill and maim large numbers of Israeli civilians in a random manner. Both organizations have fostered a cult of martyrdom and frequently use suicide bombers." [56] 

Palestinian terrorists committed a number of suicide attacks later in 2001, among them the Sbarro restaurant massacre with 15 civilian casualties (including 7 children), [77] [78] [79] the Nahariya train station suicide bombing and the Pardes Hanna bus bombing , both with 3 civilian casualties, [80] [81] [82] the Ben Yehuda Street bombing with 11 civilian deaths, many of them children, [83] and the Haifa bus 16 suicide bombing with 15 civilian casualties. [84] 2002 Military equipment confiscated from Karine A 

In January 2002, the IDF Shayetet 13 naval commandos captured the Karine A , a freighter carrying weapons from Iran towards Israel, believed to be intended for Palestinian militant use against Israel. It was discovered that top officials in the Palestinian Authority were involved in the smuggling, with the Israelis pointing the finger towards Yasser Arafat as also being involved. 

Palestinians launched a spate of suicide bombings and attacks, aimed mostly at civilians, against Israel. On 3 March, a Palestinian sniper killed 10 Israeli soldiers and settlers and wounded 4 at a checkpoint near Ofra , [85] using an M1 Carbine . He was later arrested and sentenced to life imprisonment. The rate of the attacks increased, and was at its highest in March 2002. In addition to numerous shooting and grenade attacks, that month saw 15 suicide bombings carried out in Israel, an average of one bombing every two days. The high rate of attacks caused widespread fear throughout Israel and serious disruption of daily life throughout the country. March 2002 became known in Israel as "Black March." [86] The wave of suicide bombings culminated with the Passover massacre in Netanya on 27 March, in which 30 people were killed at the Park Hotel while celebrating Passover . [87] In total, around 130 Israelis, mostly civilians, were killed in Palestinian attacks during March 2002. 

On 12 March United Nations Security Council Resolution 1397 was passed, which reaffirmed a Two-state solution and laid the groundwork for a Road map for peace . Arab leaders, whose constituencies were exposed to detailed television coverage of the violence in the conflict, set out a comprehensive Arab Peace Initiative , which was outlined by Saudi Arabia on 28 March. Arafat endorsed the proposal, while Israel reacted coolly, virtually ignoring it. [88] [89] [90] [91] 

On 29 March, Israel launched Operation Defensive Shield , which lasted until 3 May. The IDF made sweeping incursions throughout the West Bank, and into numerous Palestinian cities. The UN estimated that 497 Palestinians were killed and 1,447 wounded by the Israeli response from 1 March to 7 May, although B'Tselem registered 240 killed. [92] Most of the casualties were members of Palestinian security forces and militant groups. Israeli forces also arrested 4,258 Palestinians during the operation. [93] Israeli casualties during the operation totaled 30 dead and 127 wounded. The operation culminated with the recapturing of Palestinian Authority controlled areas. [94] Jenin Main article: Battle of Jenin IDF Caterpillar D9 

Between 2 and 11 April, a siege and fierce fighting took place in Jenin , a Palestinian refugee camp. The camp was targeted during Operation Defensive Shield after Israel determined that it had "served as a launch site for numerous terrorist attacks against both Israeli civilians and Israeli towns and villages in the area." [95] The Jenin battle became a flashpoint for both sides. Eventually, The battle was won by the IDF, after it operated a dozen of Caterpillar D9 armored bulldozers who cleared Palestinian booby traps , detonated explosive charges, razed buildings and gun-posts and proved impervious to attacks by Palestinian militants. [96] 

During the IDF's operations in the camp, Palestinian sources alleged that a massacre of hundreds of people had taken place. A senior Palestinian Authority official alleged in mid-April that some 500 had been killed. [97] During the fighting in Jenin, Israeli officials had also initially estimated hundreds of Palestinian deaths, but later said they expected the Palestinian toll to reach "45 to 55." [98] In the ensuing controversy, Israel blocked the United Nations from conducting the first-hand inquiry unanimously sought by the Security Council, but the UN nonetheless felt able to dismiss claims of a massacre in its report, which said there had been approximately 52 deaths, criticising both sides for placing Palestinian civilians at risk. [98] [99] Based on their own investigations, Amnesty International [100] and Human Rights Watch [101] charged that some IDF personnel in Jenin had committed war crimes but also confirmed that no massacre had been committed by the IDF. Both human rights organizations called for official inquiries; the IDF disputed the charges. 

After the battle, most sources, including the IDF and Palestinian Authority , placed the Palestinian death toll at 52–56; [102] HRW said this total consisted of at least 27 militants and 22 civilians, [103] while the IDF said that 48 militants and 5 civilians had been killed. [104] According to Human Rights Watch, 140 buildings had been destroyed. [105] The IDF reported that 23 Israeli soldiers had been killed and 75 wounded. [101] [106] Bethlehem Main article: Siege of the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem 

From 2 April to 10 May, a stand-off developed at the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem . IDF soldiers surrounded the church while Palestinian civilians, militants, and priests were inside. During the siege, IDF snipers killed 8 militants inside the church and wounded more than 40 people. The stand-off was resolved by the deportation to Europe of 13 Palestinian militants whom the IDF had identified as terrorists, and the IDF ended its 38-day stand-off with the militants inside the church. 2003 The aftermath of a bus bombing in Haifa in 2003. 

Following an Israeli intelligence report stating that Yasir Arafat had paid $20,000 to al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades , the United States demanded democratic reforms in the Palestinian Authority , as well the appointment of a prime minister independent of Arafat. On 13 March 2003, following U.S. pressure, Arafat appointed Mahmoud Abbas as Palestinian prime minister. 

Following the appointment of Abbas, the U.S. administration promoted the Road map for peace —the Quartet 's plan to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by disbanding militant organizations, halting settlement activity and establishing a democratic and peaceful Palestinian state. The first phase of the plan demanded that the Palestinian Authority suppress guerrilla and terrorist attacks and confiscate illegal weapons. Unable or unwilling to confront militant organizations and risk civil war, Abbas tried to reach a temporary cease-fire agreement with the militant factions and asked them to halt attacks on Israeli civilians. 

On 20 May, Israeli naval commandos intercepted another vessel, the Abu Hassan , on course to the Gaza Strip from Lebanon . It was loaded with rockets, weapons, and ammunition. Eight crew members on board were arrested including a senior Hezbollah member. 

On 29 June 2003, a temporary armistice was unilaterally declared by Fatah , Hamas and Islamic Jihad , which declared a ceasefire and halt to all attacks against Israel for a period of three months. [107] Violence decreased somewhat in the following month but suicide bombings against Israeli civilians continued as well as Israeli operations against militants. 

Four Palestinians, three of them militants, were killed in gun battles during an IDF raid of Askar near Nablus involving tanks and armoured personnel carriers (APCs); an Israeli soldier was killed by one of the militants. Nearby Palestinians claimed a squad of Israeli police disguised as Palestinian labourers opened fire on Abbedullah Qawasameh as he left a Hebron mosque. [108] YAMAM , the Israeli counter-terrorism police unit that performed the operation stated that Qawasemah opened fire on them as they attempted to arrest him. 

On 19 August, Hamas coordinated a suicide attack on a crowded bus in Jerusalem killing 23 Israeli civilians, including 7 children. Hamas claimed it was a retaliation for the killing of five Palestinians (including Hamas leader Abbedullah Qawasameh ) earlier in the week. U.S. and Israeli media outlets frequently referred to the bus bombing as shattering the quiet and bringing an end to the ceasefire. 

Following the Hamas bus attack, Israeli Defence Forces were ordered to kill or capture all Hamas leaders in Hebron and the Gaza Strip . The plotters of the bus suicide bombing were all captured or killed and Hamas leadership in Hebron was badly damaged by the IDF. Strict curfews were enforced in Nablus, Jenin, and Tulkarem; the Nablus lockdown lasted for over 100 days. In Nazlet 'Issa, over 60 shops were destroyed by Israeli civil administration bulldozers . The Israeli civil administration explained that the shops were demolished because they were built without a permit. Palestinians consider Israeli military curfews and property destruction to constitute collective punishment against innocent Palestinians. [109] 

Unable to rule effectively under Arafat, Abbas resigned in September 2003. Ahmed Qurei (Abu Ala) was appointed to replace him. The Israeli government gave up hope for negotiated settlement to the conflict and pursued a unilateral policy of physically separating Israel from Palestinian communities by beginning construction on the Israeli West Bank barrier . Israel claims the barrier is necessary to prevent Palestinian attackers from entering Israeli cities. Palestinians claim the barrier separates Palestinian communities from each other and that the construction plan is a de facto annexation of Palestinian territory. A monument near the Maxim restaurant, Haifa, in memory of the victims killed in the attack 

Following an 4 October suicide bombing in Maxim restaurant , Haifa , which claimed the lives of 21 Israelis, Israel claimed that Syria and Iran sponsored the Islamic Jihad and Hezbollah , and were responsible for the terrorist attack. The day after the Maxim massacre, IAF warplanes bombed an alleged former Palestinian training base at Ain Saheb, Syria , which had been mostly abandoned since the 1980s. Munitions being stored on the site were destroyed, and a civilian guard was injured. 2004 

In response to a repeated shelling of Israeli communities with Qassam rockets and mortar shells from Gaza, the IDF operated mainly in Rafah – to search and destroy smuggling tunnels used by militants to obtain weapons , ammunition , fugitives, cigarettes, car parts, electrical goods, foreign currency, gold, drugs , and cloth from Egypt . Between September 2000 and May 2004, ninety tunnels connecting Egypt and the Gaza Strip were found and destroyed. Raids in Rafah left many families homeless. Israel's official stance is that their houses were captured by militants and were destroyed during battles with IDF forces. Many of these houses are abandoned due to Israeli incursions and later destroyed. According to Human Rights Watch, over 1,500 houses were destroyed to create a large buffer zone in the city, many "in the absence of military necessity", displacing around sixteen thousand people. [110] 

On 2 February 2004, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon announced his plan to transfer all the Jewish settlers from the Gaza Strip . The Israeli opposition dismissed his announcement as "media spin" but the Israeli Labour Party said it would support such a move. Sharon's right-wing coalition partners National Religious Party and National Union rejected the plan and vowed to quit the government if it were implemented. Yossi Beilin , peace advocate and architect of the Oslo Accords and the Geneva Accord , also rejected the proposed withdrawal plan. He claimed that withdrawing from the Gaza Strip without a peace agreement would reward terror . 

Following the declaration of the disengagement plan by Ariel Sharon and as a response to suicide attacks on Erez crossing and Ashdod seaport (10 people were killed), the IDF launched a series of armored raids on the Gaza Strip (mainly Rafah and refugee camps around Gaza), killing about 70 Hamas militants. On 22 March 2004, an Israeli helicopter gunship killed Hamas leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin , along with his two bodyguards and nine bystanders, and on 17 April, after several failed attempts by Hamas to commit suicide bombings and a successful one that killed an Israeli policeman, Yassin's successor, Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi was killed in an almost identical way, along with a bodyguard and his son Mohammed. 

The fighting in Gaza Strip escalated severely in May 2004 after several failed attempts to attack Israeli checkpoints such as Erez crossing and Karni crossing . On 2 May, Palestinian militants attacked and shot dead a pregnant woman and her four young daughters . [111] [112] [113] [114] Amnesty International classified it as a crime against humanity and stated that it "reiterates its call on all Palestinian armed groups to put an immediate end to the deliberate targeting of Israeli civilians, in Israel and in the Occupied Territories". [115] Additionally, on 11 and 12 May, Palestinian militants destroyed two IDF M-113 APCs , killing 13 soldiers and mutilating their bodies. The IDF launched two raids to recover the bodies in which about 20–40 Palestinians were killed and great damage was caused to structures in the Zaitoun neighbourhood in Gaza and in south-west Rafah. 

Subsequently, on 18 May the IDF launched Operation Rainbow with a stated aim of striking the terror infrastructure of Rafah, destroying smuggling tunnels , and stopping a shipment of SA-7 missiles and improved anti-tank weapons. A total of 41 Palestinian militants and 12 civilians were killed in the operation, and about 45–56 Palestinian structures were demolished. Israeli tanks shelled hundreds of Palestinian protesters approaching their positions, killing 10. The protesters had disregarded Israeli warnings to turn back. This incident led to a worldwide outcry against the operation. 

On 29 September, after a Qassam rocket hit the Israeli town of Sderot and killed two Israeli children, the IDF launched Operation Days of Penitence in the north of the Gaza Strip. The operation's stated aim was to remove the threat of Qassam rockets from Sderot and kill the Hamas militants launching them. The operation ended on 16 October, leaving widespread destruction and more than 100 Palestinians dead, at least 20 of whom were under the age of 16. [116] Thirteen-year-old Iman Darweesh Al Hams was killed by the IDF when she strayed into a closed military area: the commander was accused of allegedly firing his automatic weapon at her dead body deliberately to verify the death. The act was investigated by the IDF, but the commander was cleared of all wrongdoing, [117] [118] and more recently, was fully vindicated when a Jerusalem district court found the claim to be libellous, ruled that NIS 300,000 be paid by the journalist and TV company responsible for the report, an additional NIS 80,000 to be paid in legal fees and required the journalist and television company to air a correction. [119] According to Palestinian medics, Israeli forces killed at least 62 militants and 42 other Palestinians believed to be civilians. [120] According to a count performed by Haaretz , 87 militants and 42 civilians were killed. Palestinian refugee camps were heavily damaged by the Israeli assault. The IDF announced that at least 12 Qassam launchings had been thwarted and many terrorists hit during the operation. 

On 21 October, the Israeli Air Force killed Adnan al-Ghoul , a senior Hamas bomb maker and the inventor of the Qassam rocket . 

On 11 November, Yasser Arafat died in Paris. 

Escalation in Gaza began amid the visit of Mahmoud Abbas to Syria in order to achieve a Hudna between Palestinian factions and convince Hamas leadership to halt attacks against Israelis. Hamas vowed to continue the armed struggle sending numerous Qassam rockets into open fields near Nahal Oz , and hitting a kindergarten in Kfar Darom with an anti-tank missile. 

On 9 December five Palestinians weapon smugglers were killed and two were arrested in the border between Rafah and Egypt . Later that day, Jamal Abu Samhadana and two of his bodyguards were injured by a missile strike. In the first Israeli airstrike against militants in weeks, an unmanned Israeli drone plane launched one missile at Abu Samahdna's car as it travelled between Rafah and Khan Younis in the southern Gaza Strip. It was the fourth attempt on Samhadana's life by Israel. Samhadana is one of two leaders of the Popular Resistance Committees and one of the main forces behind the smuggling tunnels . Samhadana is believed to be responsible for the blast against an American diplomatic convoy in Gaza that killed three Americans. 

On 10 December, in response to Hamas firing mortar rounds into the Neveh Dekalim settlement in the Gaza Strip and wounding four Israelis (including an 8-year-old boy), Israeli soldiers fired at the Khan Younis refugee camp (the origin of the mortars) killing a 7-year-old girl. An IDF source confirmed troops opened fire at Khan Younis, but said they aimed at Hamas mortar crews. 

The largest attack since the death of Yasser Arafat claimed the lives of five Israeli soldiers on 12 December, wounding ten others. Approximately 1.5 tons of explosives were detonated in a tunnel under an Israeli military-controlled border crossing on the Egyptian border with Gaza near Rafah, collapsing several structures and damaging others. The explosion destroyed part of the outpost and killed three soldiers. Two Palestinian militants then penetrated the outpost and killed two other Israeli soldiers with gunfire. It is believed that Hamas and a new Fatah faction, the "Fatah Hawks", conducted the highly organised and coordinated attack. A spokesman, "Abu Majad", claimed responsibility for the attack in the name of the Fatah Hawks claiming it was in retaliation for "the assassination" of Yasser Arafat, charging he was poisoned by Israel. 2005 

Palestinian presidential elections were held on 9 January, and Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) was elected as the president of the PA. His platform was of a peaceful negotiation with Israel and non-violence to achieve Palestinian objectives. Although Abbas called on militants to halt attacks against Israel, he promised them protection from Israeli incursions and did not advocate disarmament by force. 

Violence continued in the Gaza Strip, and Ariel Sharon froze all diplomatic and security contacts with the Palestinian National Authority . Spokesman Assaf Shariv declared that "Israel informed international leaders today that there will be no meetings with Abbas until he makes a real effort to stop the terror." The freezing of contacts came less than one week after Mahmoud Abbas was elected, and the day before his inauguration. Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat , confirming the news, declared "You cannot hold Mahmoud Abbas accountable when he hasn't even been inaugurated yet." [121] [122] 

Following international pressure and Israeli threat of wide military operation in the Gaza Strip , Abbas ordered Palestinian police to deploy in the northern Gaza Strip to prevent Qassam rocket and mortar shelling over Israeli settlement. Although attacks on Israelis did not stop completely, they decreased sharply. On 8 February 2005, at the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit of 2005 , Sharon and Abbas declared a mutual truce between Israel and the Palestinian National Authority . They shook hands at a four-way summit that also included Jordan and Egypt at Sharm al-Sheikh . However, Hamas and Islamic Jihad said the truce is not binding for their members. Israel has not withdrawn its demand to dismantle terrorist infrastructure before moving ahead in the Road map for peace . [123] 

Many warned that truce is fragile, and progress must be done slowly while observing that the truce and quiet are kept. On 9–10 February night, a barrage of 25–50 Qassam rockets and mortar shells hit Neve Dekalim settlement, and another barrage hit at noon. Hamas said it was in retaliation for an attack in which one Palestinian was killed near an Israeli settlement. [124] As a response to the mortar attack, Abbas ordered the Palestinian security forces to stop such attacks in the future. He also fired senior commanders in the Palestinian security apparatus. On 10 February, Israeli security forces arrested Maharan Omar Shucat Abu Hamis, a Palestinian resident of Nablus , who was about to launch a bus suicide attack in the French Hill in Jerusalem . 

On 13 February 2005, Abbas entered into talks with the leaders of the Islamic Jihad and the Hamas, for them to rally behind him and respect the truce. Ismail Haniyah, a senior leader of the group Hamas said that "its position regarding calm will continue unchanged and Israel will bear responsibility for any new violation or aggression." 

In the middle of June, Palestinian factions intensified bombardment over the city of Sderot with improvised Qassam rockets . Palestinian attacks resulted in 2 Palestinians and 1 Chinese civilian killed by a Qassam, and 2 Israelis were killed. The wave of attacks lessened support for the disengagement plan among the Israeli public. Attacks on Israel by the Islamic Jihad and the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades increased in July, and on 12 July, a suicide bombing hit the coastal city of Netanya , killing 5 civilians. On 14 July, Hamas started to shell Israeli settlements inside and outside the Gaza Strip with dozens of Qassam rockets, killing an Israeli woman. On 15 July, Israel resumed its "targeted killing" policy, killing 7 Hamas militants and bombing about 4 Hamas facilities. The continuation of shelling rockets over Israeli settlements, and street battles between Hamas militants and Palestinian policemen, threatened to shatter the truce agreed in the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit of 2005. The Israeli Defence Force also started to build up armored forces around the Gaza Strip in response to the shelling. End of the Intifada 

The ending date of the Second Intifada is disputed, as there was no definite event that brought it to an end. Some commentators such as Sever Plocker [125] consider the intifada to have ended in late 2004. With the sickness and then death of Yasser Arafat in November 2004, the Palestinians lost their internationally recognised leader of the previous three decades, after which the intifada lost momentum and lead to internal fighting between Palestinian factions (most notably the Fatah–Hamas conflict ), as well as conflict within Fatah itself. Israel's unilateral disengagement from the Gaza Strip, announced in June 2004 completed in August 2005, is also cited, for instance by Ramzy Baroud, [126] as signalling the end of the intifada. Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas vowed in the days leading to the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit of 2005 that it would mark the end of the intifada. [127] The summit resulted in Abbas declaring violence would come to an end, and Ariel Sharon agreed to release 900 Palestinian prisoners and withdraw from West Bank towns, some consider this to be the official end of the Second Intifada, although sporadic violence still continued outside PA control or condolence. [128] [129] Cause of the Second Intifada 

The Second Intifada started in September 2000, when Ariel Sharon made a visit to the Temple Mount , also known as Al-Haram Al-Sharif , an area sacred to both Jews and Muslims. This visit was seen by Palestinians as highly provocative; and Palestinian demonstrators, throwing stones at police, were dispersed by the Israeli army, using tear gas and rubber bullets. [12] On 28 September, Sharon, a Likud party candidate for Israeli Prime Minister, entered the Temple Mount, accompanied by over 1,000 security guards. [130] [131] [132] He stated on that day, "the Temple Mount is in our hands and will remain in our hands. It is the holiest site in Judaism and it is the right of every Jew to visit the Temple Mount." [133] A riot broke out among Palestinians at the site, resulting in clashes between Israeli forces and the protesting crowd. Some believe it started a day later on Friday 29 September a day of prayers, when an Israeli police and military presence was introduced and there were major clashes and deaths. [134] [135] [136] The Mitchell Report 

The Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-Finding Committee (an investigatory committee set up to look into the causes behind the breakdown in the peace process, chaired by George J. Mitchell ) published its report in May 2001. [137] 

In the Mitchell Report , the government of Israel asserted that: 

The immediate catalyst for the violence was the breakdown of the Camp David negotiations on July 25, 2000, and the "widespread appreciation in the international community of Palestinian responsibility for the impasse". In this view, Palestinian violence was planned by the PA leadership, and was aimed at "provoking and incurring Palestinian casualties as a means of regaining the diplomatic initiative". 

The Palestine Liberation Organization, according to the same report, denied that the Intifada was planned, and asserted that "Camp David represented nothing less than an attempt by Israel to extend the force it exercises on the ground to negotiations." 

The report also stated: 

From the perspective of the PLO, Israel responded to the disturbances with excessive and illegal use of deadly force against demonstrators; behavior which, in the PLO's view, reflected Israel's contempt for the lives and safety of Palestinians. For Palestinians, the widely seen images of Muhammad al-Durrah in Gaza on September 30, shot as he huddled behind his father, reinforced that perception. 

The Mitchell report concluded: 

The Sharon visit did not cause the "Al-Aqsa Intifada". But it was poorly timed and the provocative effect should have been foreseen; indeed it was foreseen by those who urged that the visit be prohibited. 

and also: 

We have no basis on which to conclude that there was a deliberate plan by the PA to initiate a campaign of violence at the first opportunity; or to conclude that there was a deliberate plan by the [Government of Israel] to respond with lethal force. Views on the Second Intifada 

Palestinians have claimed that Sharon's visit was the beginning of the Second Intifada, [131] while others have claimed that Yasser Arafat had pre-planned the uprising. [138] [139] 

Some, like Bill Clinton , [140] say that tensions were high due to failed negotiations at the Camp David Summit in July 2000. They note that there were Israeli casualties as early as 27 September; this is the Israeli "conventional wisdom", according to Dr. Jeremy Pressman, and the view expressed by the Israeli Foreign Ministry . [141] [142] [53] [143] [144] Most mainstream media outlets have taken the view that the Sharon visit was the spark that triggered the rioting at the start of the Second Intifada. [33] [145] [146] [147] In the first five days of rioting and clashes after the visit, Israeli police and security forces killed 47 Palestinians and wounded 1885, [50] while Palestinians killed 5 Israelis. [148] [149] 

Palestinians view the Second Intifada as part of their ongoing struggle for national liberation and an end to Israeli occupation, [150] whereas many Israelis consider it to be a wave of Palestinian terrorism instigated and pre-planned by then Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat . [141] [142] 

Some have claimed that Yasser Arafat and the Palestinian Authority (PA) had pre-planned the Intifada. [138] They often quote a speech made in December 2000 by Imad Falouji, the PA Communications Minister at the time, where he explains that the Intifada had been planned since Arafat's return from the Camp David Summit in July, far in advance of Sharon's visit. [151] He stated that the Intifada "was carefully planned since the return of (Palestinian President) Yasser Arafat from Camp David negotiations rejecting the U.S. conditions". [152] David Samuels quotes Mamduh Nofal, former military commander of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine , who supplies more evidence of pre-28 September military preparations. Nofal recounts that Arafat "told us, Now we are going to the fight, so we must be ready". [153] Barak as early as May had drawn up contingency plans to halt any intifada in its tracks by the extensive use of IDF snipers, a tactic that resulted in the high number of casualties among Palestinians during the first days of rioting. [154] 

Support for the idea that Arafat planned the Intifadah comes from Hamas leader Mahmoud al-Zahar , who said in September 2010 that when Arafat realized that the Camp David Summit in July 2000 would not result in the meeting of all of his demands, he ordered Hamas as well as Fatah and the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, to launch "military operations" against Israel. [155] al-Zahar is corroborated by Mosab Hassan Yousef , son of the Hamas founder and leader, Sheikh Hassan Yousef , who claims that the Second Intifada was a political maneuver premeditated by Arafat. Yousef claims that "Arafat had grown extraordinarily wealthy as the international symbol of victimhood. He wasn't about to surrender that status and take on the responsibility of actually building a functioning society." [156] 

Arafat's widow Suha Arafat reportedly said on Dubai television in December 2012 that her husband had planned the uprising. 

"Immediately after the failure of the Camp David [negotiations], I met him in Paris upon his return.... Camp David had failed, and he said to me, 'You should remain in Paris.' I asked him why, and he said, 'Because I am going to start an intifada. They want me to betray the Palestinian cause. They want me to give up on our principles, and I will not do so,'" the research institute [MEMRI] translated Suha as saying. [157] 

Israel began a unilateral pullout from Lebanon in compliance with UN Resolution 425 (1978) in May 2000, which was declared completed on 16 June. The move was widely interpreted by Arabs as an Israeli defeat and was to exercise a profound influence on tactics adopted in the Al Aqsa Uprising. [89] the PLO official Farouk Kaddoumi told reporters: "We are optimistic. Hezbollah's resistance can be used as an example for other Arabs seeking to regain their rights." [158] Many Palestinian officials have gone on record as saying that the intifada had been planned long in advance to put pressure on Israel. It is disputed however whether Arafat himself gave direct orders for the outbreak, though he did not intervene to put a break on it [24] A personal advisor to Arafat, Manduh Nufal, claimed in early 2001 that the Palestinian Authority had played a crucial role in the outbreak of the Intifada. [58] Israeli's military response demolished a large part of the infrastructure built by the PA during the years following the Oslo Accords in preparation for a Palestinian state. [159] This infrastructure included the legitimate arming of Palestinian forces for the first time: some 90 paramilitary camps had been set up to train Palestinian youths in armed conflict. [24] Some 40,000 armed and trained Palestinians existed in the occupied territories. [37] 

On 29 September 2001 Marwan Barghouti , the leader of the Fatah Tanzim in an interview to Al-Hayat , described his role in the lead up to the intifada. [160] 

I knew that the end of September was the last period (of time) before the explosion, but when Sharon reached the al-Aqsa Mosque, this was the most appropriate moment for the outbreak of the intifada.... The night prior to Sharon's visit, I participated in a panel on a local television station and I seized the opportunity to call on the public to go to the al-Aqsa Mosque in the morning, for it was not possible that Sharon would reach al-Haram al-Sharif just so, and walk away peacefully. I finished and went to al-Aqsa in the morning.... We tried to create clashes without success because of the differences of opinion that emerged with others in the al-Aqsa compound at the time.... After Sharon left, I remained for two hours in the presence of other people, we discussed the manner of response and how it was possible to react in all the cities (bilad) and not just in Jerusalem. We contacted all (the Palestinian) factions. 

Barghouti also went on record as stating that the example of Hezbollah and Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon was a factor which contributed to the Intifada. [58] 

According to Nathan Thrall , from Elliott Abrams 's inside accounts of negotiations between 2001 and 2005, it would appear to be an inescapable conclusion that violence played an effective role in shaking Israeli complacency and furthering Palestinian goals: the U.S. endorsed the idea of a Palestinian State, Ariel Sharon became the first Israeli Prime Minister to affirm the same idea, and even spoke of Israel's "occupation", and the bloodshed was such that Sharon also decided to withdraw from Gaza, an area he long imagined Israel keeping. [161] However, Zakaria Zubeidi , former Palestinian militant leader of the Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades , considers the Intifada to be a total failure that achieved nothing for the Palestinians. [162] Casualties See also: Category:Second Intifada casualties , Children in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , Israel casualties of war , and Palestinian casualties of war 

The casualty data for the Second Intifada has been reported by a variety of sources and though there is general agreement regarding the overall number of dead, the statistical picture is blurred by disparities in how different types of casualties are counted and categorized. 

The sources do not vary widely over the data on Israeli casualties. B'Tselem reports that 1,053 Israelis were killed by Palestinian attacks through 30 April 2008. [163] [ not in citation given ] Israeli journalist Ze'ev Schiff reported similar numbers citing the Shin Bet as his source [164] in an August 2004 Haaretz article where he noted: 

The number of Israeli fatalities in the current conflict with the Palestinians exceeded 1,000 last week. Only two of the country's wars – the War of Independence and the Yom Kippur War – have claimed more Israeli lives than this intifada, which began on September 29, 2000. In the Six-Day War, 803 Israelis lost their lives, while the War of Attrition claimed 738 Israeli lives along the borders with Egypt, Syria and Lebanon. [164] 

There is little dispute as to the total number of Palestinians killed by Israelis. B'Tselem reports that through 30 April 2008, there were 4,745 Palestinians killed by Israeli security forces, and 44 Palestinians killed by Israeli civilians. [163] B'Tselem also reports 577 Palestinians killed by Palestinians through 30 April 2008. [163] 

Between September 2000 and January 2005, 69 percent of Israeli fatalities were male, while over 95 percent of the Palestinian fatalities were male. [9] "Remember These Children" reports that as of 1 February 2008, 119 Israeli children, age 17 and under, had been killed by Palestinians. Over the same time period, 982 Palestinian children, age 17 and under, were killed by Israelis. [165] Combatant versus noncombatant deaths See also: Civilian casualties in the Second Intifada 

Regarding the numbers of Israeli civilian versus combatant deaths, B'Tselem reports that through 30 April 2008 there were 719 Israeli civilians killed and 334 Israeli security force personnel killed. [163] In other words, 31.7% of those killed were Israeli security force personnel, while 68.3% were civilians. Israeli total Palestinian total Israeli breakdown Palestinian breakdown 

The chart is based on B'Tselem casualty numbers. [163] It does not include the 577 Palestinians killed by Palestinians. 

B'Tselem reports [163] that through 30 April 2008, out of 4,745 Palestinians killed by Israeli security forces, there were 1,671 "Palestinians who took part in the hostilities and were killed by Israeli security forces", or 35.2%. According to their statistics, 2,204 of those killed by Israeli security forces "did not take part in the hostilities", or 46.4%. There were 870 (18.5%) who B'Tselem defines as "Palestinians who were killed by Israeli security forces and it is not known if they were taking part in the hostilities". 

The B'Tselem casualties breakdown's reliability was questioned and its methodology has been heavily criticized by a variety of institutions and several groups and researchers, most notably Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs 's senior researcher, retired IDF lieutenant colonel Jonathan Dahoah-Halevi , who claimed that B'Tselem repeatedly classifies terror operatives and armed combatants as "uninvolved civilians", but also criticized the Israeli government for not collecting and publishing casualty data. [166] Caroline B. Glick , deputy managing editor of The Jerusalem Post and former advisor to Benjamin Netanyahu , pointed to several instances where, she claimed, B'Tselem had misrepresented Palestinian rioters or terrorists as innocent victims, or where B'Tselem failed to report when an Arab allegedly changed his testimony about an attack by settlers. [167] [168] The Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America (CAMERA), which said that B'Tselem repeatedly classified Arab combatants and terrorists as civilian casualties. [169] [170] [171] [172] 

The Israeli International Policy Institute for Counter-Terrorism (IPICT), on the other hand, in a "Statistical Report Summary" for 27 September 2000, through 1 January 2005, indicates that 56% (1542) of the 2773 Palestinians killed by Israelis were combatants. According to their data, an additional 406 Palestinians were killed by actions of their own side. 22% (215) of the 988 Israelis killed by Palestinians were combatants. An additional 22 Israelis were killed by actions of their own side. [9] 

IPICT counts "probable combatants" in its total of combatants. From their full report in September 2002: 

A 'probable combatant' is someone killed at a location and at a time during which an armed confrontation was going on, who appears most likely – but not certain – to have been an active participant in the fighting. For example, in many cases where an incident has resulted in a large number of Palestinian casualties, the only information available is that an individual was killed when Israeli soldiers returned fire in response to shots fired from a particular location. While it is possible that the person killed had not been active in the fighting and just happened to be in the vicinity of people who were, it is reasonable to assume that the number of such coincidental deaths is not particularly high. Where the accounts of an incident appear to support such a coincidence, the individual casualty has been given the benefit of the doubt, and assigned a non-combatant status. [9] 

In the same 2002 IPICT full report there is a pie chart (Graph 2.9) that lists the IPICT combatant breakdown for Palestinian deaths through September 2002. Here follow the statistics in that pie chart used to come up with the total combatant percentage through September 2002: Combatants Percent of all Palestinian deaths Full Combatants 44.8% Probable Combatants 8.3% Violent Protesters 1.6% Total Combatants 54.7% 

On 24 August 2004, Haaretz reporter Ze'ev Schiff published casualty figures based on Shin Bet data. [164] The Haaretz article reported: "There is a discrepancy of two or three casualties with the figures tabulated by the Israel Defense Forces." 

Here is a summary of the figures presented in the article: Over 1,000 Israelis were killed by Palestinian attacks in the al-Aqsa Intifada. Palestinians sources claim 2,736 Palestinians killed in the Intifada. The Shin Bet has the names of 2,124 Palestinian dead. Out of the figure of 2,124 dead, Shin Bet assigned them to these organizations: 466 Hamas members 408 Fatah 's Tanzim and al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades 205 Palestinian Islamic Jihad 334 of "Palestinian security forces – for example, Force 17 , the Palestinian police, General Intelligence, and the counter security apparatus" 

The article does not say whether those killed were combatants or not. Here is a quote: 

The Palestinian security forces – for example, Force 17, the Palestinian police, General Intelligence, and the counter security apparatus – have lost 334 of its members during the current conflict, the Shin Bet figures show. [164] 

As a response to IDF statistics about Palestinian casualties in the West Bank, the Israeli human rights organization B'Tselem reported that two thirds of the Palestinians killed in 2004 did not participate in the fighting. [173] 

Prior to 2003, B'Tselem's methodology differentiated between civilians and members of Palestinian military groups, rather than between combatants and non-combatants, leading to criticism from some pro-Israel sources. [174] [175] B'Tselem no longer uses the term "civilian" and instead describes those killed as "participating" or "not participating in fighting at the time of death". [173] 

Others argue that Palestinian National Authority has, throughout the Intifada, placed unarmed men, women, children and the elderly in the line of fire, and that announcing the time and place of anti-occupation demonstrations via television, radio, sermons, and calls from mosque loudspeaker systems is done for this purpose. [176] 

In 2009, historian Benny Morris stated in his retrospective book One States, Two States that about one third of the Palestinian deaths up to 2004 had been civilians. [177] Palestinians killed by Palestinians 

B'Tselem reports that through 30 April 2008, there were 577 Palestinians killed by Palestinians. Of those, 120 were "Palestinians killed by Palestinians for suspected collaboration with Israel". [163] B'Tselem maintains a list of deaths of Palestinians killed by Palestinians with details about the circumstances of the deaths. Some of the many causes of death are crossfire, factional fighting, kidnappings, collaboration, etc. [178] 

Concerning the killing of Palestinians by other Palestinians, a January 2003 The Humanist magazine article reports: [179] 

For over a decade the PA has violated Palestinian human rights and civil liberties by routinely killing civilians—including collaborators, demonstrators, journalists, and others—without charge or fair trial. Of the total number of Palestinian civilians killed during this period by both Israeli and Palestinian security forces, 16 percent were the victims of Palestinian security forces. 

... According to Freedom House 's annual survey of political rights and civil liberties, Freedom in the World 2001–2002 , the chaotic nature of the Intifada along with strong Israeli reprisals has resulted in a deterioration of living conditions for Palestinians in Israeli-administered areas. The survey states: "Civil liberties declined due to: shooting deaths of Palestinian civilians by Palestinian security personnel; the summary trial and executions of alleged collaborators by the Palestinian Authority (PA); extra-judicial killings of suspected collaborators by militias; and the apparent official encouragement of Palestinian youth to confront Israeli soldiers, thus placing them directly in harm's way." 

Internal Palestinian violence has been called an ' Intra'fada during this Intifada and the previous one. [180] Aftermath 

On 25 January 2006, the Palestinians held general elections for the Palestinian Legislative Council . The Islamist group Hamas won with an unexpected majority of 74 seats, compared to 45 seats for Fatah and 13 for other parties and independents. Hamas is officially declared as a terrorist organization by the United States and the European Union and its gaining control over the Palestinian Authority (such as by forming the government) would jeopardize international funds to the PA, by laws forbidding sponsoring of terrorist group. 

On 9 June, seven members of the Ghalia family were killed on a Gaza beach. The cause of the explosion remains uncertain . Nevertheless, in response, Hamas declared an end to its commitment to a ceasefire declared in 2005 and announced the resumption of attacks on Israelis. Palestinians blame an Israeli artillery shelling of nearby locations in the northern Gaza Strip for the deaths, while an Israeli military inquiry cleared itself from the charges. 

On 25 June, a military outpost was attacked by Palestinian militants and a gunbattle followed that left 2 Israeli soldiers and 3 Palestinian militants dead. Corporal Gilad Shalit , an Israeli soldier, was captured and Israel warned of an imminent military response if the soldier was not returned unharmed. In the early hours of 28 June Israeli tanks, APCs and troops entered the Gaza strip just hours after the air force had taken out two main bridges and the only powerstation in the strip, effectively shutting down electricity and water. Operation Summer Rains commenced, the first major phase of the Gaza–Israel conflict , which continues to run independently of the intifada. 

On 26 November 2006, a truce was implemented between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. A 10 January 2007, Reuters article reports: "Hamas has largely abided by a November 26 truce which has calmed Israeli-Palestinian violence in Gaza." [181] Rocket and mortar shells from Gaza into Israel, February 2009 

An intensification of the Gaza–Israel conflict, the Gaza war , occurred on 27 December 2008 (11:30 a.m. local time; 09:30 UTC ) [182] when Israel launched a military campaign codenamed Operation Cast Lead ( Hebrew : מבצע עופרת יצוקה ‎‎) targeting the members and infrastructure of Hamas in response to the numerous rocket attacks upon Israel from the Gaza Strip. [183] [184] [185] The operation has been termed the Gaza massacre ( Arabic : مجزرة غزة ‎‎) by Hamas leaders and much of the media in the Arab World . [186] [187] [188] [189] [190] [191] [192] [193] [194] [195] 

On Saturday, 17 January 2009, Israel announced a unilateral ceasefire, conditional on elimination of further rocket and mortar attacks from Gaza, and began withdrawing over the next several days. [196] Hamas later announced its own ceasefire, with its own conditions of complete withdrawal and opening of border crossings. A reduced level of mortar fire originating in Gaza continues, though Israel has so far not taken this as a breach of the ceasefire. The frequency of the attacks can be observed in the thumbnailed graph. The data corresponds to the article " Timeline of the 2008–2009 Israel–Gaza conflict ", using mainly Haaretz news reports from the 1 February [197] up to the 28 February. [198] The usual IDF responses are airstrikes on weapon smuggling tunnels. [ citation needed ] Deaths in 2006 

The violence continued on both sides throughout 2006. On 27 December the Israeli Human Rights Organization B'Tselem released its annual report on the Intifada. According to which, 660 Palestinians, a figure more than three times the number of Palestinians killed in 2005, and 23 Israelis, have been killed in 2006. From a 28 December Haaretz article: [199] "According to the report, about half of the Palestinians killed, 322, did not take part in the hostilities at the time they were killed. 22 of those killed were targets of assassinations, and 141 were minors." 405 of 660 Palestinians were killed in the 2006 Israel-Gaza conflict , which lasted from 28 June till 26 November. Tactics 

Palestinian tactics ranged from mass protests and general strikes , similar to the First Intifada , to armed attacks on Israeli soldiers, security forces, police, and civilians. Methods of attack include suicide bombings , [200] launching rockets and mortars into Israel , [201] [202] kidnapping of both soldiers [203] [204] and civilians, [205] including children, [72] [206] shootings, [207] [208] [209] [210] [211] [212] [213] assassination, [214] stabbings, [72] [215] stonings, [215] [216] and lynchings. [217] [218] [219] [220] 

Israeli tactics included curbing Palestinians' movements through the setting up of checkpoints and the enforcement of strict curfews in certain areas. Infrastructural attacks against Palestinian Authority targets such as police and prisons was another method to force the Palestinian Authority to repress the anti-Israeli protests and attacks on Israeli targets . [ citation needed ] Palestinians 

Militant groups involved in violence include Hamas , Palestinian Islamic Jihad , Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades . They waged a high-intensity campaign of guerrilla warfare against Israeli military and civilian targets inside Israel and in the occupied territory, utilizing tactics such as ambushes , sniper attacks , and suicide bombings . Military equipment was mostly imported, while some light arms, hand grenades and explosive belts , assault rifles , and Qassam rockets were indigenously produced. They also increased use of remote-controlled landmines against Israeli armor, a tactic that was highly popular among the poorly armed groups. Car bombs were often used against "lightly hardened" targets such as Israeli armored jeeps and checkpoints. Also, more than 1,500 Palestinian drive-by shootings killed 75 people in only the first year of the Intifada. [221] 

Among the most effective Palestinian tactics was the suicide bombing ( see List ). Conducted as a single or double bombing, suicide bombings were generally conducted against "soft" targets, or "lightly hardened" targets (such as checkpoints) to try to raise the cost of the war to Israelis and demoralize the Israeli society. Most suicide bombing attacks (although not all) targeted civilians, and conducted on crowded places in Israeli cities, such as public transport, restaurants, and markets. 

One recent development is the use of suicide bombs carried by children . Unlike most suicide bombings, the use of these not only earned condemnation from the United States and from human rights groups such as Amnesty International , but also from many Palestinians and much of the Middle East press. The youngest Palestinian suicide bomber was 16-year-old Issa Bdeir, a high school student from the village of Al Doha, who shocked his friends and family when he blew himself up in a park in Rishon LeZion , killing a teenage boy and an elderly man. The youngest attempted suicide bombing was by a 14-year-old captured by soldiers at the Huwwara checkpoint before managing to do any harm. 

In May 2004, Israel Defense minister Shaul Mofaz claimed that United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East 's ambulances were used to take the bodies of dead Israeli soldiers in order to prevent the Israel Defense Forces from recovering their dead. [222] Reuters has provided video of healthy armed men entering ambulance with UN markings for transport. UNRWA initially denied that its ambulances carry militants but later reported that the driver was forced to comply with threats from armed men. UNRWA still denies that their ambulances carried body parts of dead Israeli soldiers. 

In August 2004, Israel said that an advanced explosives-detection device employed by the IDF at the Hawara checkpoint near Nablus discovered a Palestinian ambulance had transported explosive material. 

Some of the Palestinian reaction to Israeli policy in the West Bank and Gaza Strip has consisted of non-violent protest, [223] [224] [225] primarily in and near the village of Bil'in . Groups such as the Palestinian Centre for Rapprochement, which works out of Beit Sahour, formally encourage and organize non-violent resistance. [226] Other groups, such as the International Solidarity Movement openly advocate non-violent resistance. Some of these activities are done in cooperation with internationals and Israelis, such as the weekly protests against the Israeli West Bank Barrier carried out in villages like Bi'lin, [227] Biddu [228] and Budrus. [229] [230] This model of resistance has spread to other villages like Beit Sira, [231] Hebron, Saffa, and Ni'lein. [232] [233] During the Israeli re-invasion of Jenin and Nablus, "A Call for a Non-violent Resistance Strategy in Palestine" was issued by two Palestinian Christians in May 2002. [234] 

Non-violent tactics have sometimes been met with Israeli military force. For example, Amnesty International notes that "10-year-old Naji Abu Qamer, 11-year-old Mubarak Salim al-Hashash and 13-year-old Mahmoud Tariq Mansour were among eight unarmed demonstrators killed in the early afternoon of May 19, 2004 in Rafah, in the Gaza Strip, when the Israeli army open fire on a non-violent demonstration with tank shells and a missile launched from a helicopter gunship. Dozens of other unarmed demonstrators were wounded in the attack." According to Israeli army and government officials, the tanks shelled a nearby empty building and a helicopter fired a missile in a nearby open space in order to deter the demonstrators from proceeding towards Israeli army positions. [235] Israel IDF Caterpillar D9 armoured bulldozer . Military experts cited the D9 as a key factor in keeping IDF casualties low. The Israeli Air Force (IAF) AH-64 Apache were used as platform for shooting guided missiles at Palestinian targets and employed at the targeted killings policy against senior militants and terrorists leaders. 

The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) countered Palestinian attacks with incursions against militant targets into the West Bank and Gaza Strip, adopting highly effective urban combat tactics. The IDF stressed the safety of their troops, using such heavily armored equipment as the Merkava heavy tank and armored personnel carriers, and carried out airstrikes with various military aircraft including F-16s , drone aircraft and helicopter gunships to strike militant targets. Much of the ground fighting was conducted house-to-house by well-armed and well-trained infantry. Due to its superior training, equipment, and numbers, the IDF had the upper hand during street fighting. Palestinian armed groups suffered heavy losses during combat, but the operations were often criticized internationally due to the civilian casualties often caused. Palestinian metalworking shops and other business facilities suspected by Israel of being used to manufacture weapons are regularly targeted by airstrikes, as well as Gaza Strip smuggling tunnels. 

Israeli Caterpillar D9 armored bulldozers were routinely employed to detonate booby traps and IEDs , to demolish houses along the border with Egypt that were used for shooting at Israeli troops, to create "buffer zones", and to support military operations in the West Bank. Until February 2005, Israel had in place a policy to demolish the family homes of suicide bombers after giving them a notice to evacuate. Due to the considerable number of Palestinians living in single homes, the large quantity of homes destroyed, and collateral damage from home demolitions, it became an increasingly controversial tactic. Families began providing timely information to Israeli forces regarding suicide bombing activities in order to prevent the demolition of their homes, although families doing so risked being executed or otherwise punished for collaboration , either by the Palestinian Authority or extrajudicially by Palestinian militants. The IDF committee studying the issue recommended ending the practice because the policy was not effective enough to justify its costs to Israel's image internationally and the backlash it created among Palestinians. [236] 

With complete ground and air superiority, mass arrests were regularly conducted by Israeli military and police forces; at any given time, there were about 6,000 Palestinian prisoners detained in Israeli prisons, about half of them held temporarily without a final indictment, in accordance with Israeli law. 

The tactic of military " curfew " – long-term lockdown of civilian areas – was used extensively by Israel throughout the Intifada. The longest curfew was in Nablus , which was kept under curfew for over 100 consecutive days, with generally under two hours per day allowed for people to get food or conduct other business. 

Security Checkpoints and roadblocks were erected inside and between Palestinian cities, subjecting all people and vehicles to security inspection for free passage. Israel defended those checkpoints as being necessary to stop militants and limit the ability to move weapons around. However some Palestinian, Israeli and International observers and organizations have criticized the checkpoints as excessive, humiliating, and a major cause of the humanitarian situation in the Occupied Territories. Transit could be delayed by several hours, depending on the security situation in Israel. Sniper towers were used extensively in the Gaza Strip before the Israeli pullout . 

The Israeli intelligence services Shin Bet and Mossad penetrated Palestinian militant organizations by relying on moles and sources within armed groups, tapping communication lines, and aerial reconnaissance. [237] within the groups the Israeli Security Forces (IDF, Magav, police YAMAM and Mistaravim SF units) to thwart hundreds of suicide bombings by providing real-time warnings and reliable intelligence reports, and a list of Palestinians marked for targeted killings. 

Israel extensively used " targeted killings ", the assassinations of Palestinian leaders involved in perpetrating attacks against Israelis, to eliminate imminent threats and to deter others from following suit, relying primarily on airstrikes and covert operations by Shin Bet to carry them out. Israel has been criticized for the use of helicopter gunships in urban assassinations, which often results in civilian casualties. Israel in turn has criticized what it describes as a practice of militant leaders hiding among civilians in densely populated areas, thus turning them into unwitting human shields . In one of the most controversial killings, the Mossad (Israeli foreign intelligence service) allegedly killed Hamas leader Mahmoud al-Mabhouh in Dubai , using forged passports to slip agents into Dubai. Throughout the Intifada, the Palestinian leadership suffered heavy losses through targeted killings. 

The practice has been widely condemned as extrajudicial executions by the international community, [238] [239] while the Israeli High Court ruled that it is a legitimate measure of self-defense against terrorism. [240] Many [ who? ] criticize the targeted killings for placing civilians at risk, though its supporters believe it reduces civilian casualties on both sides. 

In response to repeated rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip, the Israeli Navy imposed a maritime blockade on the area. Israel also sealed the border and closed Gaza's airspace in coordination with Egypt , and subjected all humanitarian supplies entering the Strip to security inspection before transferring them through land crossings. Construction materials were declared banned due to their possible use to build bunkers. [241] The blockade has been internationally criticized as a form of " collective punishment " against Gaza's civilian population. [242] 

Although Israel's tactics also have been condemned internationally, Israel insists they are vital for security reasons in order to thwart terrorist attacks. Some cite figures, such as those published in Haaretz newspaper, to prove the effectiveness of these methods ( Graph 1: Thwarted attacks (yellow) vs successful attacks (red) – Graph 2: Suicide bombing within the "green line" per quarter ). International involvement See also: Israel, Palestinians, and the United Nations ; Israel-United States relations ; International Solidarity Movement ; and International aid to Palestinians 

The international community has long taken an involvement in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , and this involvement has only increased during the al-Aqsa Intifada. Israel currently receives $3 billion in annual military aid from the United States , excluding loan guarantees. [243] Even though Israel is a developed industrial country, it has remained as the largest annual recipient of US foreign assistance since 1976. [244] It is also the only recipient of US economic aid that does not have to account for how it is spent. [244] The Palestinian Authority receives $100 million annually in military aid from the United States and $2 billion in global financial aid, including "$526 million from Arab League , $651 million from the European Union , $300 million from the US and about $238 million from the World Bank ". [245] According to the United Nations, the Palestinian territories are among the leading humanitarian aid recipients. [246] [247] 

Additionally, private groups have become increasingly involved in the conflict, such as the International Solidarity Movement on the side of the Palestinians, and the American Israel Public Affairs Committee on the side of the Israelis. 

In the 2001 and 2002 Arab League Summits , the Arab states pledged support for the Second Intifada just as they had pledged support for the First Intifada in two consecutive summits in the late 1980s. [248] Effects on Oslo Accords 

Since the start of the al-Aqsa Intifada and its emphasis on suicide bombers deliberately targeting civilians riding public transportation ( buses ), the Oslo Accords are viewed with increasing disfavor by the Israeli public. 

In May 2000, seven years after the Oslo Accords and five months before the start of the al-Aqsa Intifada, a survey [249] by the Tami Steinmetz Center for Peace Research at the Tel Aviv University found that 39% of all Israelis support the Accords and that 32% believe that the Accords will result in peace in the next few years. In contrast, the May 2004 survey found that 26% of all Israelis support the Accords and 18% believe that the Accords will result in peace in the next few years; decreases of 13% and 16% respectively. Furthermore, later survey found that 80% of all Israelis believe the Israel Defense Forces have succeeded in dealing with the al-Aqsa Intifada militarily. [250] Economic costs Israel 

The Israeli commerce has experienced much hardship, in particular because of the sharp drop in tourism. A representative of Israel's Chamber of Commerce has estimated the cumulative economic damage caused by the crisis at 150 to 200 billion Shekels, or 35 to 45 billion US $ – against an annual GDP of 122 billion dollars in 2002. [251] As the suicide bombings were sharply decreasing after 2005 following IDF 's and Shin-Bet 's efforts, the Israeli economy has recovered. Palestinian Authority 

The Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator in the Occupied Territories (UNSCO) estimates the damage done to the Palestinian economy at over 1.1 billion dollars in the first quarter of 2002, compared to an annual GDP of 4.5 billion dollars. [251] See also First Intifada (1987-1993) Taba Summit (2001) Sharm el-Sheikh Summit of 2005 Israeli disengagement from Gaza (2005) Israeli West Bank barrier - started in 2002 House demolition in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict Sumud (steadfastness) 1990 Temple Mount riots Silent Intifada (2014) Israeli–Palestinian conflict (2015) Palestinian political violence Palestinian nationalism Palestinian territories List of modern conflicts in the Middle East 

Directly connected to the Second Intifada and its aftermath: List of Palestinian suicide attacks Civilian casualties in the Second Intifada List of Israeli civilian casualties in the Second Intifada List of Palestinian civilian casualties in the Second Intifada Violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2000 Violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2001 Violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2002 Violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2003 Violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2004 Violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2005 Violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2006 Violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2007 Violence in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2008 References ^ (Turkish) Saddam: 'İsrail'e sınırımız olsa çoktan girmiştik' ( Hürriyet ) ^ Amos Harel; Avi Issacharoff (1 October 2010). "Years of Rage" . Haaretz . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Laura King (28 September 2004). "Losing faith in the intifada" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Jackson Diehl (27 September 2004). "From Jenin to Falluja" . The Washington Post . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Zeev Chafetz (22 July 2004). "The Intifadeh is over – just listen" . World Jewish Review . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Major-General (res) Yaakov Amidror (23 August 2010). " Winning the counterinsurgency war: The Israeli experience " . Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Hillel Frisch (12 January 2009). "The need for a decisive Israeli victory over Hamas" (PDF) . Begin–Sadat Center for Strategic Studies . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ a b c "B'Tselem – Statistics – Fatalities," . B'Tselem . Archived from the original on 1 July 2010. ^ a b c d e "Breakdown of Fatalities: 27 September 2000 through 1 January 2005" . International Institute for Counter-Terrorism . Archived from the original on 3 July 2007. Full report: Don Radlauer (29 September 2002). "An Engineered Tragedy: Statistical Analysis of Casualties in the Palestinian - Israeli Conflict, September 2000 - September 2002" . International Institute for Counter-Terrorism . Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. . Also at Don Radlauer. "An Engineered Tragedy: Statistical Analysis of Casualties in the Palestinian - Israeli Conflict, September 2000 - September 2002" . EretzYisroel.Org . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Intifada toll 2000-2005" . BBC News. 8 February 2005 . Retrieved 10 November 2012 . ^ "Field Update on Gaza from the Humanitarian Coordinator" (PDF) . United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs . 9 January 2009 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ a b George J. Mitchell ; et al. (30 April 2001). "Report of The Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-Finding Committee" . UNISPAL . p. 4 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . See under "What Happened?". ^ B'Tselem – Statistics – Fatalities 29.9.2000-15.1.2005 , B'Tselem . Archived 3 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine . ^ "Terrorism Against Israel: Comprehensive Listing of Fatalities (September 1993 - Present)" . Jewish Virtual Library . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "The full text of Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas's declaration of a ceasefire with the Israelis at the Sharm al-Sheikh summit" . BBC News. 8 February 2005 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . We have agreed with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to stop all acts of violence against Israelis and Palestinians, wherever they are.... [w]e have announced today not only represents the implementation of the first articles of the roadmap.... ^ "The full text of Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's declaration of a ceasefire with the Palestinians at the Sharm al-Sheikh summit" . BBC News. 8 February 2005 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . Today, in my meeting with Chairman Abbas, we agreed that all Palestinians will stop all acts of violence against all Israelis everywhere and, in parallel, Israel will cease all its military activity against all Palestinians anywhere.... The disengagement plan can pave the way to implementation of the roadmap, to which we are committed and which we want to implement. ^ https://libcom.org/history/1977-egypts-bread-intifada ^ Itamar Rabinovich (2004). Waging Peace: Israel and the Arabs, 1948–2003 . Princeton University Press . p. 306. ISBN 978-0691119823 . ^ Devin Sper (2004). The Future of Israel . Sy Publishing. p. 335. ISBN 978-0976161301 . ^ Binyamin Elon (2005). God's Covenant With Israel: Establishing Biblical Boundaries in Today's World . Balfour Books. p. 45. ISBN 978-0892216277 . ^ Ben-Ami, Shlomo (2006). Scars of War, Wounds of Peace . London: Oxford University Press . p. 267. ISBN 978-0195181586 . Israel's disproportionate response to what had started as a popular uprising with young, unarmed men confronting Israeli soldiers armed with lethal weapons fueled the Intifada beyond control and turned it into an all-out war. ^ Hillel Frisch, The Palestinian Military: Between Militias and Armies, Routledge, 2010 p.102. ^ a b c d Serge Schmemann (5 December 1997). "In West Bank, 'Time' for Settlements Is Clearly Not 'Out ' " . The New York Times . Retrieved 18 December 2007 . ^ a b c David M. Rosen, Armies of the Young: Child Soldiers in War and Terrorism, Rutgers University Press, 2005 p.119 ^ "Palestinian Parliament Expected to Not Declare an Independent Palestinian State" . CNN. 10 September 2000 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Extraordinary Increase in Settlement Construction as Diplomacy Falters" . Settlement Report . Foundation for Middle East Peace . 8 (2). March–April 1998. [ dead link ] ^ "Housing Starts in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza Strip Settlements*, 1990-2003" . Foundation for Middle East Peace . Archived from the original on 18 November 2008 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ a b Tim Youngs, International Affairs and Defence Section (24 January 2001). "The Middle East Crisis: Camp David, the 'Al-Aqsa Intifada' and the Prospects for the Peace Process" (PDF) . House of Commons Library . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2008 . Retrieved 18 December 2007 . ^ "Palestinians And Israelis In a Clash At Holy Site" . The New York Times . 28 September 2000. ^ Bard, Mitchell Geoffrey (2005). "28". The Complete Idiot's Guide to Middle East Conflict (3rd ed.). Alpha. p. 395. ISBN 978-1592574100 . ^ Colin Shindler (2008). A History of Modern Israel . Cambridge University Press. p. 283. ISBN 978-0521615389 . ^ Hillel Cohen, https://books.google.com/books?id=KRKsAgAAQBAJ pg=PA73 The Rise and Fall of Arab Jerusalem: Palestinian Politics and the City Since 1967, Routledge, 2013 p.73 ^ a b "On This Day: 'Provocative' mosque visit sparks riots" . BBC News. 28 September 2000 . Retrieved September 2014 . Palestinians and Israeli police have clashed in the worst violence for several years at Jerusalem's holiest site, the compound around Al-Aqsa mosque. The violence began after a highly controversial tour of the mosque compound early this morning by hardline Israeli opposition leader Ariel Sharon.... Soon after Mr Sharon left the site, the angry demonstrations outside erupted into violence. Israeli police fired tear gas and rubber-coated metal bullets, while protesters hurled stones and other missiles. Police said 25 of their men were hurt by missiles thrown by Palestinians, but only one was taken to hospital. Israel Radio reported at least three Palestinians were wounded by rubber bullets.... Following Friday [September 29, 2000] prayers the next day, violence again broke out throughout Jerusalem and the West Bank. Check date values in: |access-date= ( help ) ^ Greenberg, Joel (5 October 2000). "Unapologetic, Sharon Rejects Blame for Igniting Violence" . The New York Times . Retrieved 23 May 2010 . ^ Lee Hockstader (29 September 2000). "Israeli's Tour of Holy Site Ignites Riot; Palestinians Angered By Test of Sovereignty in Jerusalem's Old City" . The Washington Post . p. A22 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Palestinians say opposition tour of holy site could cause bloodshed" . CNN. Associated Press . 27 September 2000. Archived from the original on 10 December 2004. ^ a b Rashmi Singh, Hamas and Suicide Terrorism: Multi-causal and Multi-level Approaches, Routledge, 2013 p.38 ^ a b c Menachem Klein (2003). The Jerusalem Problem: The Struggle for Permanent Status . University Press of Florida . p. 98. ISBN 978-0813026732 . ^ Schiff, Ze'ev ; Ehud Ya'ari (1984). Israel's Lebanon War . Simon Schuster . p. 284. ISBN 0-671-47991-1 . ^ Colin Shindler , A History of Modern Israel, Cambridge University Press, 2013 p.283 ^ Yossef Bodansky , The High Cost of Peace (Prima Publishing, 2002) ISBN 0-7615-3579-9 pp. 353–354 ^ "Interview with Acting FM Ben-Ami on Newshour with Jim Lehrer- PBS TV-1-Nov-2000" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 1 November 2000 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ MacFarquhar, Neil (5 January 2006). "Few Kind Words for Sharon in the Arab World" . The New York Times . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Juliana Ochs (2011). Security and Suspicion: An Ethnography of Everyday Life in Israel . The Ethnography of Political Violence. University of Pennsylvania Press . p. 6. ISBN 978-0812242911 . ^ Colin Shindler, A History of Modern Israel, Cambridge University Press, 2013 p.283 ^ Sontag, Deborah (30 September 2000). "Battle at Jerusalem Holy Site Leaves 4 Dead and 200 Hurt" . NY Times . Retrieved 14 November 2014 . ^ Dellios, Hugh (30 September 2000). "4 Dead, Scores Wounded In Jerusalem Clashes" . Chicago Tribune . Jerusalem . Retrieved 14 November 2014 . police clashed with stone-throwing Palestinians, killing four and wounding scores ^ "CNN's Jerrold Kessel on continuing violence in the Mideast" . CNN. 29 September 2000 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Menachem Klein (2003). The Jerusalem Problem: The Struggle for Permanent Status . University Press of Florida . pp. 97–98. ISBN 978-0813026732 . ^ a b c Menachem Klein (2003). The Jerusalem Problem: The Struggle for Permanent Status . University Press of Florida . p. 97. ISBN 978-0813026732 . ^ "Israel and the Occupied Territories: Excessive use of lethal force" . Amnesty International . 19 October 2000. Archived from the original on 16 January 2006. ^ Gilead Sher (2006). The Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations, 1999–2001: within reach . Routledge . pp. 161–162. ISBN 978-0714685427 . :"Your account of events does not match the impression of any country in the world," he said. "At Camp David, Israel did in fact make a significant step towards peace, but Sharon's visit was the detonator, and everything has exploded. This morning, sixty-four Palestinians are dead, nine Israeli-Arabs were also killed, and you’re pressing on. You cannot, Mr Prime Minister, explain this ratio in the number of [killed and] wounded. You cannot make anyone believe that the Palestinians are the aggressors....When I was a company commander in Algeria, I also thought I was right. I fought the guerillas. Later I realized I was wrong. It is the honour of the strong, to reach out and not to shoot. Today you must reach out your hand. If you continue to fire from helicopters on people throwing rocks, and you continue to refuse an international inquiry, you are turning down a gesture from Arafat. You have no idea how hard I pushed Arafat to agree to a trilateral meeting....' ^ a b "Sgt. David Biri" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 27 September 2000. Archived from the original on 4 August 2004. ^ "Border Police Supt. Yosef Tabeja" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 29 September 2000. ^ Earlier estimates gave a million bullets and projectiles shot by Israeli forces in the first few days, 700,000 in the West Bank and 300,000 in the Gaza strip. See Ben Kaspit, "Jewish New Year 2002—the Second Anniversary of the Intifada," Maariv 6 September 2002 (Heb), in Cheryl Rubenberg, The Palestinians: In Search of a Just Peace , Lynne Rienner Publishers , 2003 p. 324, p. 361 n. 5. The figure was revealed by Amos Malka , then-director of Military Intelligence. Moshe Ya'alon , who later became the Israeli Chief of Staff, denied the 1.3 million figure, claiming that the number reflected the demand of the command units for supplemental ammunition. [ Pedatzur, Reuven (4 December 2008). "Deflater of defeatist discourse" . Haaretz . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ] ^ a b "Israel and the Occupied Territories: Broken Lives – A Year of Intifada" . Amnesty International . Archived from the original on 29 March 2014 . Retrieved 4 November 2012 . ^ Nitzan Ben-Shaul, A Violent World: TV News Images of Middle Eastern Terror and War, Rowman Littlefield, 6 March 2007 pp.118-120. ^ a b c Catignani, Sergio (2008). "The Al-Aqsa Intifada" . Israeli Counter-Insurgency and the Intifadas: Dilemmas of a Conventional Army . Routledge . pp. 104–106. ISBN 9781134079971 . Retrieved 19 August 2015 . ^ "The Or Inquiry – Summary of Events" . Haaretz . 19 November 2001 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Eve Spangler, Understanding Israel/Palestine: Race, Nation, and Human Rights in the Conflict, Springer, 2015 p.183 ^ Asser, Martin (13 October 2000). "Lynch mob's brutal attack" . BBC News . Retrieved 3 September 2006 . ^ Gideon Levy (20 October 2000). "A conversation with Colonel Kamel al-Sheikh, Ramallah's chief of police, amid the ruins of his police station, where two Israeli soldiers were lynched by an angry mob last week" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 4 August 2001. ^ Feldman, Shai (November 2000). "The October Violence: An Interim Assessment" . Strategic Assessment . Jaffes Center for Strategic Studies. Archived from the original on 29 June 2001. ^ Philps, Alan (13 October 2000). "A day of rage, revenge and bloodshed" . The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Israeli copters retaliate for soldiers' deaths" . USA Today . 8 November 2000 . Retrieved 03-07-09 . Check date values in: |access-date= ( help ) [ dead link ] ^ "Time Line of Second (Al-Aqsa) Intifada" . MidEastWeb. Archived from the original on 17 December 2008. ^ Hershman, Tania (19 January 2001). "Israel's 'First Internet Murder ' " . Wired . Archived from the original on 19 October 2007. ^ Charles W. Greenbaum; Philip E. Veerman; Naomi Bacon-Shnoor, eds. (2006). Protection of children during armed political conflict: a multidisciplinary perspective . Intersentia. ISBN 978-9050953412 . Retrieved 21 June 2012 . ^ Daniel Gordis (2003). Home to Stay: One American Family's Chronicle of Miracles and Struggles in Contemporary Israel . Random House . Retrieved 21 June 2012 . ^ "Target: Israeli Children" . Israel Ministry of Education . Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. ^ "Two Israeli boys found bludgeoned to death" . The Guardian . 9 May 2001 . Retrieved 18 June 2012 . ^ a b c Matthew Kalman (20 June 2001). "Two Israeli teenagers stoned to death" . USA Today . Retrieved 18 June 2012 . ^ Ely Karmon (11 June 2001). " The Palestinian Authority-Hamas Collusion – From Operational Cooperation to Propaganda Hoax " . International Institute for Counter-Terrorism . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ O'Sullivan, Arieh (25 November 2001). "No. 1 Hamas terrorist killed. Followers threaten revenge in Tel Aviv." . The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 30 January 2009 . ^ Fisher, Ian (29 January 2006). "In Hamas's Overt Hatred, Many Israelis See Hope" . The New York Times . Retrieved 30 January 2009 . ^ " 21 צעירות וצעירים נהרגו בפיגוע התופת בטיילת בתל אביב, לא הרחק מהדולפינריום. אלה תמונות ההרוגים בפיגוע הקשה ביותר בישראל מזה חמש שנים. ynet מביא את חלק מסיפוריהם. " [21 young people were killed in bomb attack in Tel Aviv promenade, near the Dolphinarium. These pictures of the dead worst attack in Israel for five years. Ynet brings some of their stories.] (in Hebrew). Ynet . 2 June 2001 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Niall Stanage (3 February 2002). "Death of innocents" . The Sunday Business Post . Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown ( link ) ^ "Suicide bombing at the Sbarro pizzeria in Jerusalem" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 2 October 2000. Archived from the original on 1 June 2004. ^ Raanan Ben-Zur (27 March 2006). "Sbarro terrorist 'not sorry ' " . Ynetnews . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Margot Dudkevitch; Arieh O'Sullivan (10 September 2001). "Five killed as terror hits nationwide. First Israeli Arab suicide bomber strikes at Nahariya train station" . The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 20 December 2002. ^ Amos Harel; Haim Shadmi; David Ratner; Yam Yehoshua (28 November 2001). "Islamic Jihad, Fatah take responsibility for bus bombing" . Haaretz . Retrieved 18 June 2012 . ^ "Suicide Bomber kills 3 Israelis ahead of Bush-Sharon meeting" . The Blade . Toledo. Knight Ridder , Associated Press . 30 November 2011. p. A2 . Retrieved 18 June 2012 . ^ "Suicide bombing at the Ben-Yehuda pedestrian mall in Jerusalem" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 1 December 2001. Archived from the original on 18 June 2004. ^ Statistics | B'Tselem Archived 29 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine . ^ "Sgt.-Maj.(res.) Yochai Porat" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 3 March 2002 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Ophir Falk; Henry Morgenstein, eds. (2009). Suicide terror: understanding and confronting the threat . Wiley. ISBN 978-0470087299 . ^ "Operation Defensive Shield: Palestinian Testimonies, Soldiers' Testimonies" (PDF) . B'Tselem . July 2007 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 . ^ Barry Rubin ,Judith Colp Rubin, Yasir Arafat: A Political Biography, Oxford University Press, 2003 p.427 n.14 ^ a b Philip Mattar , https://books.google.com/books?id=GkbzYoZtaJMC pg=PA40 Encyclopedia of the Palestinians, Infobase Publishing, 2005 p.40. ^ Neil Caplan, The Israel-Palestine Conflict: Contested Histories, John Wiley Sons, 2011 p.167 ^ Galia Golan, Israeli Peacemaking Since 1967: Factors Behind the Breakthroughs and Failures, Routledge, 2014 p.170. ^ "List of Palestinians killed by Israeli security forces in the West Bank" . B'Tselem . Archived from the original on 20 July 2015. ^ "Operation Defensive Shield (2002)" . Ynetnews . 12 March 2009 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Report of Secretary-General on recent events in Jenin, other Palestinian cities" (Press release). United Nations . 1 August 2002 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Jenin's Terrorist Infrastructure" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 4 April 2002 . Retrieved 22 September 2008 . ^ Matt Rees , (13 May 2002). "Untangling Jenin's Tale" . Time . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "UN says no massacre in Jenin" . BBC News. 1 August 2002 . Retrieved 19 May 2012 . ^ a b Bennet, James (2 August 2002). "Death on the Campus: Jenin; U.N. Report Rejects Claims of a Massacre of Refugees" . The New York Times . Retrieved 19 May 2012 . ^ "U.N. report: No massacre in Jenin" . USA Today . Associated Press . 1 August 2002 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Shielded from Scrutiny: IDF violations in Jenin and Nablus" (PDF) . Amnesty International . November 2002. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 December 2013 . Retrieved 19 May 2012 . Amnesty International's extensive research ... led it to conclude that ... some of the actions amounted to ... war crimes. ^ a b "Jenin: IDF Military Operations" (PDF) . Human Rights Watch . May 2002. p. 3 . Retrieved 19 May 2012 . Human Rights Watch's research demonstrates that, during their incursion into the Jenin refugee camp, Israeli forces committed serious violations of international humanitarian law, some amounting prima facie to war crimes. ^ Paul Martin (1 May 2002). "Jenin 'massacre' reduced to death toll of 56" . The Washington Times . Archived from the original on 15 April 2003. ^ "Jenin" . Human Rights Watch . 2 May 2002 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Harel and Issacharoff (2004), pp. 257–258 [ title missing ] ^ Audeh, Ida (2002). "Narratives of Siege: Eye-Witness Testimonies from Jenin, Bethlehem, and Nablus" . Journal of Palestine Studies . 31 (4): 13. doi : 10.1525/jps.2002.31.4.13 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 . ^ "Report of the Secretary-General prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution ES-10/10" . United Nations . Archived from the original on 6 August 2002 . Retrieved 29 March 2006 . ^ "Texts: Palestinian truces" . BBC News. 29 June 2003 . Retrieved 28 September 2004 . ^ Alan Philps (23 June 2003). "Israel defends Hamas death" . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 4 June 2004. ^ "Israelis flatten West Bank shops" . BBC News. 21 January 2003 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 . ^ "Razing Rafah: Mass Home Demolitions in the Gaza Strip" . Human Rights Watch . Archived from the original on 24 March 2006 . Retrieved 29 March 2006 . ^ "Tali Hatuel, Hila, Hadar, Roni, and Merav" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 2 May 2004. Archived from the original on 16 October 2012. ^ "Gunmen kill Jewish settler family" . BBC News. 3 May 2004 . Retrieved 28 September 2012 . ^ "Pregnant mum and four children gunned down" . The Sydney Morning Herald . 3 May 2004 . Retrieved September 2014 . Check date values in: |access-date= ( help ) ^ Silverin, Eric (3 May 2004). "Pregnant mum and her four children killed in terror attack" . Irish Independent . Retrieved September 2014 . Check date values in: |access-date= ( help ) ^ "Israel/Occupied Territories: AI condemns murder of woman and her four daughters by Palestinian gunmen" . Amnesty International . 4 May 2004. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ McGreal, Chris (16 October 2004). "Army pulls back from Gaza leaving 100 Palestinians dead" . The Guardian . Retrieved 23 May 2010 . ^ "Moral Quagmire" . The Jewish Week . 3 December 2004. Archived from the original on 4 December 2004. ^ Ben Lynfield (26 November 2004). "Israeli army under fire after killing girl" . The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Hila Raz (20 January 2010). "Does it pay to sue for libel in Israel?" . Haaretz . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Palestinians sift rubble after Israel's Gaza assault" . Reuters. 16 October 2004. Archived from the original on 16 October 2004. ^ "Sharon suspends contacts with Palestinian Authority" . CNN. 14 January 2005 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Israel cuts Palestinian contacts" . BBC News. 14 January 2005 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 . ^ "Mid-East leaders announce truce" . BBC News. 8 February 2005 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 . ^ "Abbas orders security crackdown" . BBC News. 10 February 2005 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 . ^ Sever Plocker (22 June 2008). "2nd Intifada forgotton" . Ynetnews . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Ruth Tenne (Autumn 2007). "Rising of the oppressed: the second Intifada" . International Socialism (116) . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . Review of Ramzy Baroud; Kathleen Christison; Bill Christison; Jennifer Loewenstein (2006). The Second Palestinian Intifada: A Chronicle of a People's Struggle . Pluto Press . ISBN 978-0745325477 . ^ Gilmore, Inigo (4 February 2005). "Palestinian ceasefire ends four-year intifada" . The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 23 May 2010 . ^ "Timeline (Chronology) of Israel and Zionism 1993–present day" . ZioNation . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ Brad A. Greenberg (3 December 2008). "UC to Reopen Study in Israel" . The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ James L. Gelvin (2007). The Israel-Palestine conflict: one hundred years of war (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press . p. 243. ISBN 978-0521716529 . ^ a b "Al-Aqsa Intifada timeline" . BBC News. 29 September 2004 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ Jonathan Frankel, ed. (2005). Dark Times, Dire Decisions: Jews and Communism . Studies in Contemporary Jewry. XX . Oxford University Press . p. 311. ISBN 978-0195182248 . ^ Suzanne Goldenberg (29 September 2000). "Rioting as Sharon visits Islam holy site" . The Guardian . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ George J. Mitchell ; et al. (30 April 2001). "Report of The Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-Finding Committee" . UNISPAL . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . Mr. Sharon made the visit on September 28 accompanied by over 1,000 Israeli police officers. Although Israelis viewed the visit in an internal political context, Palestinians saw it as a provocation to start a fair intifadah. On the following day, in the same place, a large number of unarmed Palestinian demonstrators and a large Israeli police contingent confronted each other. ^ Cypel, Sylvain (2006). Walled: Israeli Society at an Impasse . Other Press. p. 6. ISBN 1-59051-210-3 . The following day, the 29th, a Friday and hence the Muslim day of prayer, the young Palestinians flared up.... ^ Alan Mittleman ; Robert A. Licht; Jonathan D. Sarna (2002). Jewish Polity and American Civil Society: Communal Agencies and Religious Movements in the American Public Sphere . Rowman Littlefield. p. 161. ISBN 0-7425-2122-2 . Then in late September Ariel Sharon [...] visited the Temple Mount [...] The next day, massive violence erupted in Jerusalem and Palestinian-controlled areas in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. ^ George J. Mitchell ; et al. (30 April 2001). "Report of The Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-Finding Committee" . UNISPAL . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . PDF ^ a b Khaled Abu Toameh (19 September 2014). "How the war began" . Retrieved 29 March 2006 . ^ "Suha Arafat admits husband premeditated Intifada" . Jerusalem Post . 29 December 2012. ^ Clinton, Bill (2004). My Life . Random House . ISBN 1-4000-3003-X . ^ a b Jeremy Pressman (Fall 2003). "The Second Intifada: Backgrounds and Causes of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict" (PDF) . Journal of Conflict Studies . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 March 2009. ^ a b "Israel, the Conflict and Peace: Answers to frequently asked questions" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 1 November 2007 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . The wave of terrorism that began in September 2000 is the direct result of a strategic Palestinian decision to use violence – rather than negotiation – as the primary means to advance their agenda.... 

Indeed, the current wave of terrorism began shortly after intense high-level negotiations were conducted to find a permanent resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 

In July 2000, a Middle East peace summit was held at Camp David, hosted by U.S. President Bill Clinton and attended by Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser Arafat and Israel's Prime Minister Ehud Barak. During the summit, Israel expressed its willingness to make far-reaching and unprecedented compromises in order to arrive at a workable, enduring agreement. However, Yasser Arafat chose to break off the negotiations without even offering any proposals of his own. Consequently, the summit adjourned with President Clinton placing the blame for its failure squarely at Arafat's feet.... 

It is clear that the wave of Palestinian terrorism, which began in the wake of the Camp David summit failure, has nothing to do with a spontaneous Palestinian action to "resist the occupation." The Palestinian leadership had taken a strategic decision to abandon the path to peace and to use violence as their primary tactic for advancing their agenda. This decision undermined the bedrock foundation of the peace process – the understanding that a solution can only be reached through compromise rather than inflexibility, and through negotiation rather than violence. 

The Palestinian claim that Israel's presence in the territories caused the terrorism began as a desperate attempt to deflect criticism after Arafat rejected Israel's peace proposals. It quickly evolved into an excuse for the inexcusable – the indiscriminate murder of innocent civilians. 

Terrorist attacks can never be justified, and they are particularly tragic when the disputed issues could have been settled through negotiations. The Palestinian Authority had been given a real opportunity to end the conflict through negotiations. However, Israel's olive branch was met with a hail of gunfire and a barrage of suicide bombers. The greatest obstacle to peace is not the lack of a Palestinian state, rather it is the existence of Palestinian terrorism. ^ "Palestinian violence and terrorism since September 2000" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . The events of last few days represent the latest and most severe developments in a wave of violence that has been building in recent weeks. Though some are inclined to assign exclusive responsibility to Israel for these acts of provocation, the present Palestinian escalation dates back to well before the Temple Mount disturbances, when, on September 13, stones and Molotov cocktails were thrown at Israeli positions in the vicinity of the Netzarim junction in the Gaza Strip. This was followed by a number of increasingly violent incidents, including the killing of an Israeli soldier by a roadside bomb near Netzarim on September 27. ^ "Fallen soldier's father: I never thought this would happen" . The Jerusalem Post . ITIM . 29 September 2000. Archived from the original on 19 February 2003. ^ Sontag, Deborah (30 September 2000). "Battle at Jerusalem Holy Site Leaves 4 Dead and 200 Hurt" . The New York Times . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . This morning, both sides started out tense, after clashes on Thursday [September 28, 2000] provoked by Mr. Sharon's visit. ^ "Israeli troops, Palestinians clash after Sharon visits Jerusalem sacred site" . CNN. 28 September 2000. Archived from the original on 8 November 2005. A visit by Likud Party leader Ariel Sharon to the site known as the Temple Mount by Jews sparked a clash on Thursday [September 28, 2000] between stone-throwing Palestinians and Israeli troops, who fired tear gas and rubber bullets into the crowd.... Also Thursday [September 28, 2000], an Israeli soldier critically injured in a bomb attack on an army convoy in the Gaza Strip died of his wounds. ^ Gozani, Ohad (29 September 2000). "Riot police clash with protesters at holy shrine" . The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 23 May 2010 . ^ "B'Tselem – Statistics – Fatalities - Israeli security force personnel killed by Palestinians in the Occupied Territories" . B'Tselem . Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. ^ "B'Tselem – Statistics – Fatalities - Israeli civilians killed by Palestinians in the Occupied Territories" . B'Tselem . Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. ^ Schulz and Hammer, 2003, pp. 134–136. ^ "(view video of the speech)" . YouTube . 17 July 2006 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ Stewart Ain (20 December 2000). "PA: Intifada Was Planned" . The Jewish Week . Archived from the original on 10 March 2005. ^ David Samuels (September 2005). "In a Ruined Country: How Yasir Arafat destroyed Palestine" . The Atlantic . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ David Pratt (2007). Intifada: The Long Day of Rage . Casemate Publishers . p. 113. ISBN 978-1-932-03363-2 . As far back as May 2000 Ehud Barak and his advisors had themselves drafted operational and tactical contingency plans of their own to halt the intifada in its tracks. These included the massive use of IDF snipers, which resulted in the high numbers of Palestinian dead and wounded in the first few days of the uprising. It was these tactics as much as any advanced planning that many believed transformed a series of violent clashes into a full-blown intifada. ^ Khaled Abu Toameh (29 September 2010). "Arafat ordered Hamas attacks against Israel in 2000" . The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Mosab Hassan Yousef (2011). Son of Hamas . Tyndale House . pp. 125–134. ISBN 978-1-85078-985-7 . ^ " ' Suha Arafat admits husband premeditated Intifada ' " . The Jerusalem Post . 29 December 2012 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Hussein Dakroub (26 March 2002). "Arafat Aide, Hezbollah Leader Meet" . Associated Press . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Nasser Abufarha, The Making of a Human Bomb: An Ethnography of Palestinian Resistance, Duke University Press, 2009 p.77. ^ Barry M. Rubin ; Judith Colp Rubin (2003). Yasir Arafat: A Political Biography . Oxford University Press . p. 204. ISBN 978-0195166897 . ^ Nathan Thrall , 'What Future for Israel?,' New York Review of Books 15 August 2013 pp.64-67. ^ Gutman, Matthew (4 August 2004). "Aqsa Brigades Leader: Intifada in Its Death Throes". Jerusalem Post . ^ a b c d e f g B'Tselem – Statistics – Fatalities , B'Tselem . ^ a b c d Ze'ev Schiff (24 August 2004). "Israeli death toll in Intifada higher than last two wars" . Haaretz . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Remember these Children" . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . Comprehensive list of all Israeli and Palestinian child casualties, age 17 and under, listed since September 2000 along with the circumstances of their deaths. ^ Tamar Sternthal (2 November 2008). "Updated: In 2007, B'Tselem Casualty Count Doesn't Add Up" . CAMERA . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . Includes translation of article in Hebrew in Haaretz presenting Dahoah-Halevi's report. 

Original Haaretz report in Hebrew: Amos Harel (25 October 2008). "מחקר: "בצלם" מפרסם מידע שגוי ומשמיט פרטים חיוניים" [Study: "B'Tselem" publishes false information and omits vital details] . Haaretz . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Column one: What is Israel's problem?" . The Jerusalem Post . 10 May 2007. Archived from the original on 15 September 2012. , ^ Caroline B. Glick (7 January 2011). "Column One: Agents of influence" . The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Tamar Sternthal (7 July 2003). "B'Tselem, Los Angeles Times Redefine "Civilian " " . CAMERA . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Sternthal, Tamar (24 September 2008). "Bending the truth" . Ynetnews . Retrieved 26 September 2008 . ^ Gil Ronen (26 October 2008). "Researcher Slams B'Tselem as Inflating Arab Civilian Casualties" . Arutz Sheva . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Tamar Sternthal (3 January 2007). "B'Tselem's Annual Casualty Figures Questioned" . CAMERA . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ a b "Two-thirds of Palestinians Killed in the West Bank This Year Did not Participate in the Fighting" . B'Tselem . 8 December 2004 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Alexander A. Weinreb; Avi Weinreb (Summer 2002). "Has Israel Used Indiscriminate Force?" . Middle East Quarterly : 17–25 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Tamar Sternthal (8 July 2003). "Mis-reporting Palestinian Fatalities" . CAMERA . Archived from the original on 27 November 2005 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ Itamar Marcus ; Barbara Crook (2 June 2004). "Engineering civilian casualties" . The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Benny Morris (2009). One State, Two States: Resolving the Israel/Palestine Conflict . Yale University Press . pp. 151–152. ISBN 978-0300122817 . ^ "B'Tselem – Statistics – Fatalities. Palestinians killed by Palestinians in the Occupied Territories" . Detailed B'Tselem list. Archived 3 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine . ^ Erika Waak (January–February 2003). "Violence among the Palestinians" . The Humanist . American Humanist Association . Archived from the original on 11 February 2003. ^ Leonie Schultens (April 2004). "The ' Intra'fada or 'the chaos of the weapons': An Analysis of Internal Palestinian Violence" . The Palestinian Human Rights Monitor . Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group . Archived from the original on 6 June 2004. ^ Sean Maguire; Khaled Oweis (10 January 2007). "Exclusive-Hamas leader says Israel's existence is a reality" . Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 October 2007. ^ Harel, Amos (27 December 2008). "Analysis / IAF strike on Gaza is Israel's version of 'shock and awe ' " . Haaretz . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Israel braced for Hamas response" . BBC News. 2 January 2009 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 . ^ "Israel pounds Gaza for fourth day" . BBC News. 30 December 2008 . Retrieved 14 January 2009 . ^ "Israel vows war on Hamas in Gaza" . BBC News. 30 December 2008. Archived from the original on 30 December 2008 . Retrieved 30 December 2008 . ^ "Israeli Gaza 'massacre' must stop, Syria's Assad tells US senator" . Google News . Agence France-Presse . 30 December 2008. Archived from the original on 9 January 2009 . Retrieved 11 January 2009 . ^ "Factions refuse Abbas' call for unity meeting amid Gaza massacre" . Journal of Turkish Weekly . Ma'an News Agency . 30 December 2008. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009 . Retrieved 11 January 2009 . ^ Basil Adas (28 December 2008). "Iraqi leaders discuss Gaza massacre" . Gulf News . Archived from the original on |archive-url= requires |archive-date= ( help ) . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Hamas slammed the silent and still Arab position on Gaza massacre" – "Israel airstrikes on Gaza kill at least 205" . Khaleej Times . Deutsche Presse-Agentur (DPA) . 27 December 2008. Archived from the original on 23 January 2009. ^ "it's impossible to contain the Arab and Islamic world after the Gaza massacre" – "Hamas denies firing rockets from Lebanon" . Special Broadcasting Service . Agence France-Presse . 8 January 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009 . Retrieved 11 January 2009 . ^ "Arab Leaders Call for Palestinian Unity During "Terrible Massacre " " . Fox News . Associated Press . 31 December 2008. Archived from the original on 7 January 2009 . Retrieved 7 January 2009 . ^ "Gulf leaders tell Israel to stop Gaza 'massacres ' " . Reuters . 30 December 2008. Archived from the original on 7 January 2009 . Retrieved 7 January 2009 . ^ "OIC, GCC denounce massacre in Gaza" . Arab News . 28 December 2008. Archived from the original on 7 January 2009 . Retrieved 7 January 2009 . ^ سباق دبلوماسي لوقف مذبحة غزة [Diplomatic race to stop the Gaza massacre] (in Arabic). BBC News. 5 January 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009 . Retrieved 11 January 2009 . ^ "United Nations Security Council 6060th meeting (Click on the page S/PV.6060 record for transcript)" . United Nations Security Council . 31 December 2008. Archived from the original on 17 December 2008 . Retrieved 7 January 2009 . ^ Ravid, Barak (18 January 2009). "IDF begins Gaza troop withdrawal, hours after ending 3-week offensive" . Haaretz . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Yuval Azoulay (2 January 2009). "Two IDF soldiers, civilian lightly hurt as Gaza mortars hit Negev" . Haaretz . Associated Press . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Yagna, Yanir (2 April 2008). "Ten rockets hit southern Israel, one damages Ashkelon school" . Haaretz . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "B'Tselem: Israeli security forces killed 660 Palestinians during 2006" . Haaretz . 28 December 2006 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Efraim Benmelech; Claude Berrebi (Summer 2007). "Human Capital and the Productivity of Suicide Bombers" (PDF) . Journal of Economic Perspectives . 21 (3): 223–238. doi : 10.1257/jep.21.3.223 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 July 2010. ^ "Q A: Gaza conflict" . BBC News. 18 January 2009 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Gaza's rocket threat to Israel" . BBC News. 21 January 2008 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Hamas releases audio of captured Israeli" . USA Today . 25 June 2007 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Timeline / 1,940 days from Gilad Shalit's abduction to his release" . Haaretz . 11 October 2011 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Eliyahu Pinhas Asheri" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 2006 . Retrieved 20 June 2012 . June 25, 2006 – Eliahu Asheri, 18, of Itamar was kidnapped by terrorists from the Popular Resistance Committees while hitchhiking to Neveh Tzuf, where he was studying. His body was found on June 29 in Ramallah. It is believed that he was murdered shortly after his kidnapping. ^ Marcus Gee (10 May 2001). "Mr. Day Speaks the Truth" . The Globe and Mail . Toronto. p. A.19. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012 . Retrieved 20 June 2012 . ^ Efrat Weiss (28 June 2006). "Abductors present Eliyahu Asheri's ID card" . Ynetnews . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Yaakov Katz (28 May 2007). "IDF nabs Ze'ev Kahane's murderer" . The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Tania Hershman (19 January 2001). "Israel's 'First Internet Murder ' " . Wired . Archived from the original on 19 October 2007. ^ "The Murder of Ofir Rahum" . Israel Government Portal. Archived from the original on 19 July 2007. ^ " Yaakov Katz (7 March 2008). "Eight killed at Jerusalem school" . BBC News . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Terror Attack At Jerusalem Seminary – Merkaz HaRav Yeshiva – 8 Dead" . National Terror Alert Response Center. 6 March 2008 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Jerusalem seminary attacked" . United Press International. 6 March 2008. Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. ^ Assaf Zohar (17 October 2001). "Minister of Tourism Rehavam Zeevi assassinated at point-blank range in Jerusalem Hyatt" . Globes . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ a b "Victims of Palestinian Violence and Terrorism since September 2000" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Phil Reeves. " ' Get tough' call to Sharon as Jewish boys stoned to death" . Irish Independent . Retrieved 11 March 2011 . ^ Philps, Alan (13 October 2000). "A day of rage, revenge and bloodshed" . The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 20 June 2012 . ^ "Coverage of Oct 12 Lynch in Ramallah by Italian TV Station RAI" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 17 October 2000. Archived from the original on 18 April 2010 . Retrieved 20 June 2012 . ^ "Lynch mob's brutal attack" . BBC News. 13 October 2000 . Retrieved 20 June 2012 . ^ Whitaker, Raymond (14 October 2000). "A strange voice said: I just killed your husband" . The Independent . London . Retrieved 20 June 2012 . ^ Gal Luft (July–August 2002). "The Palestinian H-Bomb: Terror's Winning Strategy" . Foreign Affairs . 81 (4): 2–7. doi : 10.2307/20033234 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "Terrorist organizations exploit UNRWA vehicles: during the Israeli army operation in the Zeitun quarter of Gaza, UNWRA vehicles were used to smuggle armed terrorists out of the area and in all probability remains of Israeli soldiers as well" . Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center at the Center for Special Studies (C.S.S). May 2004. Archived from the original on 3 June 2004. ^ Kobi Snitz (15 December 2004). "We are all Ahmed Awwad: Lessons in Popular Resistance" . Znet . Archived from the original on 18 April 2005. ^ "Palestinian Nonviolent Resistance to Occupation Since 1967" (PDF) . Faces of Hope . American Friends Service Committee. Fall 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 November 2005. ^ "Palestinian non-violent resistance" . Mazin Qumsiyeh. Archived from the original on 27 August 2004. ^ Kaufman, Maxine. "Peace Magazine v20n4p22: A Glimpse of Palestinian Nonviolence" . Peace Magazine . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ Elmer, Jon. "Protest, Grief as Barrier Segregates Palestinian Village from Farms" . The NewStandard . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ "News From Within- Home Numbers" . 13 June 2001 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 . ^ "Budrus has a hammer" . ZNet . 17 March 2005. Archived from the original on 18 April 2005. ^ Ran HaCohen (11 December 2004). "The Third Intifada" . Antiwar.com . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ "Palestinian non violent resistance continues: the experience of Beit Sira" . Palestine Monitor . 21 February 2006. Archived from the original on 27 May 2006. ^ Jamal Jumá (26 March 2005). "The great divide" . The Hindu . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ Jamal Jumá (7–13 April 2005). "Palestine is not for sale!" . Al-Ahram . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ "Palestinian Christians Call for Non-Violent Resistance" . National Council of Churches . 10 May 2002 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . ^ "Israel and the Occupied Territories and the Palestinian Authority: Act Now to Stop the Killing of Children!" . Amnesty International. 20 November 2004. Archived from the original on 20 December 2004. ^ Gabi Siboni , Defeating Suicide Terrorism in Judea and Samaria, 2002–2005 , " Military and Strategic Affairs ", Volume 2, No. 2, October 2010. ^ (PDF) . School of Politics and International Studies http://www.polis.leeds.ac.uk/assets/files/research/working-papers/wp16jones.pdf . Missing or empty |title= ( help ) [ dead link ] ^ Milanovic, Marko (June 2007). "Lessons for human rights and humanitarian law in the war on terror: comparing Hamdan and the Israeli Targeted Killings case" (PDF) . International Review of the Red Cross . 89 (866): 375 . Retrieved 9 July 2015 . ^ "UN envoy condemns Israel's extra-judicial assassinations" . UN News Centre. 25 August 2003 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Israeli High Court Backs Military On Its Policy of Targeted Killings . Scott Wilson, Washington Post, 15 December 2006 ^ Tavernise, Sabrina (26 January 2009). "In Gaza, the Wait to Rebuild Lingers" . The New York Times . p. A6 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ "EU warns against 'collective punishment' in Gaza" . Reuters. 29 October 2007 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Ruebner, Josh (26 February 2010). "U.S. Can't Afford Military Aid to Israel" . The Huffington Post . Retrieved 16 November 2010 . ^ a b Mearsheimer, John ; Walt, Stephen (2008). The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux . ISBN 978-0374531508 . ^ Arieh O'Sullivan ; Felice Friedson. "Jewish-Agency-style 'Palestine Network; launched in Bethleh" . The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 28 September 2014 . ^ Juan Carlos Concepcion (9 September 2013). "Top 10 recipients of EU aid" . Devex. ^ Jim Zanotti (3 July 2014). "U.S. Foreign Aid to the Palestinians" (PDF) . Federation of American Scientists. ^ Sela, Avraham . "Arab Summit Conferences". The Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East . Ed. Sela. New York: Continuum, 2002. pp. 158–160 ^ The Peace Index Project conducted at the Tami Steinmetz Center for Peace Archived 2 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine . ^ מדד השלום (PDF) (in Hebrew). The Tami Steinmetz Center for Peace Research. May 2004. ^ a b Tabarani, Gabriel G. (2008). Israeli-Palestinian Conflict: From Balfour Promise to Bush Declaration: THE COMPLICATIONS AND THE ROAD FOR A LASTING PEACE . AuthorHouse. pp. 242–243. ISBN 9781434372376 . Bibliography Schulz, Helena Lindholm; Hammer, Juliane (2003). The Palestinian Diaspora: Formation of Identities and Politics of Homeland . Routledge . ISBN 978-0-415-26820-2 . Catignani, Sergio (March 2008). Israeli counter-insurgency and the Intifadas: dilemmas of a conventional army . Routledge . ISBN 978-0-203-93069-4 . Retrieved 14 February 2012 . Yousef, Mosab Hassan (2011). Son of Hamas: A Gripping Account of Terror, Betrayal, Political Intrigue, and Unthinkable Choices . Tyndale House . ISBN 978-1-85078-985-7 . Retrieved 4 January 2013 . v t e Israeli–Palestinian conflict Participants Israel Israel Defense Forces Israel Police Mossad Shabak (Shin Bet) Palestinians Principals Palestinian National Authority Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Fatah Hamas Other groups al-Aqsa Brigades DFLP PLF PIJ PPSF PFLP PFLP-GC PRC Third-party groups Arab League Hezbollah Individuals Israelis Moshe Arens Ami Ayalon Ehud Barak Menachem Begin Meir Dagan Moshe Dayan Avi Dichter Yuval Diskin David Ben-Gurion Efraim Halevy Dan Halutz Tzipi Livni Golda Meir Shaul Mofaz Yitzhak Mordechai Benjamin Netanyahu Ehud Olmert Shimon Peres Yaakov Peri Yitzhak Rabin Amnon Lipkin-Shahak Yitzhak Shamir Ariel Sharon Shabtai Shavit Moshe Ya'alon Danny Yatom Zvi Zamir Palestinians Abu Abbas Mahmoud Abbas Moussa Arafat Yasser Arafat Yahya Ayyash Marwan Barghouti Mohammed Dahlan Mohammed Deif George Habash Wadie Haddad Ismail Haniyeh Nayef Hawatmeh Amin al-Husayni Ghazi Jabali Ahmed Jibril Abu Jihad Salah Khalaf Leila Khaled Sheikh Khalil Khaled Mashal Zuheir Mohsen Abu Ali Mustafa Abu Nidal Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Jibril Rajoub Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi Ali Hassan Salameh Salah Shehade Ramadan Shalah Fathi Shaqaqi Ahlam Tamimi Ahmed Yassin Timeline Background 1920–1948 Mandatory Palestine ( intercommunal conflict ) 1920 Nebi Musa riots 1921 Jaffa riots 1929 Palestine riots Hebron massacre 1936–39 Arab revolt 1937–48 Irgun attacks 1947–48 Civil War 1948–1970 1948 Arab–Israeli War massacres 1948–present Fedayeen insurgency 1951–1967 Attacks against Israeli civilians 1950s–1960s IDF reprisal operations 1953 Qibya massacre 1956 Kafr Qasim / Khan Yunis / Rafah massacres 1967 Six-Day War 1967–70 War of Attrition 1968 Battle of Karameh Palestinian 

insurgency 1968–1982 1970 Avivim school bus massacre 1972 Sabena Flight 571 / Munich massacre / Operation "Wrath of God" ( 1973 Lillehammer affair ) 1974 Kiryat Shmona massacre / Ma'alot massacre 1975 Savoy Hotel attack 1976 Operation "Entebbe" 1978 Coastal Road massacre / South Lebanon conflict 1980 Misgav Am hostage crisis 1973–1987 1973 Yom Kippur War 1975 Zion Square bombing 1982 Lebanon War Siege of Beirut 1984 Bus 300 affair 1985 Achille Lauro hijacking / Operation "Wooden Leg" 1987 Night of the Gliders First Intifada 1987–1991 1988 Tunis Raid 1989 Bus 405 attack 1990 Temple Mount riots 1990s Palestinian suicide attacks 1994 Cave of the Patriarchs massacre Second Intifada 2000–2005 Palestinian rocket attacks list Palestinian suicide attacks Israeli assassinations 2000 October events 2001 Santorini 2002 Karine A / Operation "Defensive Shield" / Battle of Jenin / Battle of Nablus / Operation "Determined Path" 2003 Abu Hasan / Ain es Saheb airstrike 2004 Operation "Rainbow" / Beit Hanoun raid / Operation "Days of Penitence" 2006–2010 2006 Operation "Bringing Home the Goods" 2008 Mercaz HaRav / Jerusalem bulldozer attack 2009 Temple Mount riots 2010 Palestinian militancy campaign Gaza–Israel 

conflict 2006– present 2006 Gaza beach explosion / Gaza cross-border raid / Operation "Summer Rains" / Operation "Autumn Clouds" / Beit Hanoun shelling 2008 Gaza–Egypt border breach / Operation "Hot Winter" 2008–09 Gaza War 2010 Gaza flotilla raid 2012 Operation "Returning Echo" / Operation "Pillar of Defense" 2014 Operation "Protective Edge" 2015 Freedom Flotilla III , Israeli–Palestinian conflict (2015–present) Diplomacy Timeline 1948–1991 1948 Palestinian exodus depopulated Arab settlements 1949 Lausanne Conference 1967–present Israeli settlement settler violence international law 1990s 1991 Madrid Conference 1993/95 Oslo Accords 1994 Protocol on Economic Relations (Paris Protocol) 1994 Gaza–Jericho Agreement 1994–present US security assistance to PNA 1997 Hebron Agreement 1998 Wye River Memorandum 1999 Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum 2000s 2000 Camp David Summit 2001 Taba Summit 2002 Quartet established 2003 Road Map 2005 Israeli disengagement from Gaza 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access 2006 Valley of Peace initiative 2007 Annapolis Conference 2009 Aftonbladet Israel controversy 2010s 2010–11 Israeli–Palestinian peace talks 2011 Palestine Papers 2013–14 Israeli–Palestinian peace talks United Nations 1947 UN Resolution 181 1948 UN Resolution 194 1967 UN Resolution 242 v t e Arab–Israeli conflict v t e Countries Authorities Organizations Primary countries 

and authorities All-Palestine Egypt Hamas Gaza Iraq Kuwait Israel Jordan Lebanon Palestinian National Authority Saudi Arabia Syria Organizations Active Abu Nidal Organization Amal al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades Syrian Social Nationalist Party Arab League Arab Liberation Front Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine Fatah Guardians of the Cedars Hamas Hezbollah Jaish al-Islam Kataeb Lebanese Forces al-Mourabitoun Muslim Brotherhood Palestinian Islamic Jihad Palestine Liberation Front Palestine Liberation Organization Palestinian Popular Struggle Front Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine – General Command Popular Resistance Committees as-Sa'iqa Inactive or 

former Arab Higher Committee Arab Liberation Army Black Hand Black September Haganah Holy War Army Irgun (Etzel) Japanese Red Army Lehi Palmach Revolutionary Cells South Lebanon Army Other countries Algeria China Cuba France Iran Kuwait Libya Morocco North Korea Norway Pakistan Russia Sudan Tunisia Turkey Uganda United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Venezuela Yemen Transnational European Union United Nations Former states Mandatory Palestine Soviet Union United Arab Republic v t e People Lester B. Pearson Abd al-Hakim Amer Hosni Mubarak Gamal Abdel Nasser Anwar Sadat Mahmoud Ahmadinejad Ali Khamenei Ruhollah Khomeini Faisal I Saddam Hussein Ehud Barak Menachem Begin David Ben-Gurion Moshe Dayan Levi Eshkol Golda Meir Benjamin Netanyahu Ehud Olmert Shimon Peres Yitzhak Rabin Yitzhak Shamir Ariel Sharon Chaim Weizmann King Abdullah I of Jordan King Abdullah II of Jordan King Hussein of Jordan Émile Lahoud Hassan Nasrallah Fouad Siniora Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Mona Juul Johan Jørgen Holst Terje Rød-Larsen Mahmoud Abbas Yasser Arafat Marwan Barghouti George Habash Ismail Haniyeh Haj Amin al-Husseini Khaled Mashal Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi Ahmad Shukeiri Ahmed Yassin King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia King Fahd of Saudi Arabia King Faisal of Saudi Arabia Folke Bernadotte Hafez al-Assad Bashar al-Assad Shukri al-Quwatli Salah Jadid Ernest Bevin Arthur Balfour Tony Blair Richard Crossman Madeleine Albright Ralph Bunche George H. W. Bush George W. Bush Jimmy Carter Bill Clinton Henry Kissinger Ronald Reagan Condoleezza Rice Dennis Ross Ramadan Shalah Harry S. Truman Cyrus Vance v t e Armed engagements Background 1920 Battle of Tel Hai 1936–39 Arab revolt 1944 Operation ATLAS 1947–1950s 1947–48 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine 1948–49 Arab–Israeli War 1950s Palestinian Fedayeen attacks / Reprisal operations 1956 Suez Crisis 1960s 1966 Operation Shredder 1967 Six-Day War 1967–70 War of Attrition 1968 Battle of Karameh Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon 1968 Operation Gift 1970s–1980 1973 Yom Kippur War Palestinian insurgency 

in South Lebanon 1972 Operation Isotope / Lod Airport massacre / Munich Olympics massacre 1972–79 Operation Wrath of God ( Airstrike , Spring of Youth ) 1973 Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 114 1974 Ma'alot massacre 1975 Savoy Operation 1976 Operation Entebbe 1978 Coastal Road massacre / Operation Litani 1980 Misgav Am hostage crisis 1980s 1981 Operation Opera 1982 Lebanon War 1982–2000 South Lebanon conflict 1984 Bus 300 affair 1985 Operation Wooden Leg 1987–93 First Intifada 1988 Mothers' Bus rescue / Tunis raid 1990s 1992 Operation Bramble Bush 1993–2008 Palestinian suicide attacks 1993 Operation Accountability 1996 Operation Grapes of Wrath 2000s 2000–05 Al-Aqsa Intifada (Second Intifada) 2000–06 Shebaa Farms conflict 2001– present Rocket and mortar attacks on southern Israel 2003 Ain es Saheb airstrike 2006 Operation Bringing Home the Goods / Operation Summer Rains / Operation Autumn Clouds / Lebanon War 2006– present Gaza–Israel conflict 2007–08 Operation Hot Winter 2008–09 Gaza War 2007 Operation Orchard 2007– present Lebanese rocket attacks 2010s 2010 Adaisseh skirmish / Palestinian militancy campaign Gaza–Israel conflict 2011 Southern Israel cross-border attacks 2012 Operation Returning Echo / Operation Pillar of Defense 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict 2015 Israeli–Palestinian conflict (2015–present) v t e Diplomacy and peace proposals To 1948 1914 Damascus Protocol 1915 McMahon–Hussein Correspondence 1916 Sykes–Picot Agreement 1917 Balfour Declaration 1918 Declaration to the Seven / Anglo-French Declaration 1919 Faisal–Weizmann Agreement 1920 San Remo conference 1922 Churchill White Paper 1937 Peel Commission 1939 White Paper 1947 UN Partition Plan 1948 American trusteeship proposal 1948–91 1948 UN General Assembly (UNGA) Resolution 194 1949 Armistice agreements / Lausanne Conference 1950 Tripartite Declaration 1964 Palestinian National Covenant 1967 Khartoum Resolution / UN Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 242 1973 UNSC Resolution 338 / UNSC Resolution 339 1974 Israel–Syria disengagement agreement / UNSC Resolution 350 1978 UNSC Resolution 425 / Camp David Accords 1979 UNSC Resolution 446 / Egypt–Israel Peace Treaty / UNSC Resolution 452 1980 UNSC Resolution 478 1981 UNSC Resolution 497 1983 Israel–Lebanon agreement 1991– present 1991 Madrid Conference 1993 Oslo Accords 1994 Gaza–Jericho Agreement / Israel–Jordan peace treaty 1995 Beilin-Abu Mazen agreement 1998 Wye River Memorandum 1999 Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum 2000 Camp David Summit / Clinton Parameters 2001 Taba Summit 2002 Beirut Summit and peace initiative / Road map 2003 Geneva Initiative 2004 UNSC Resolution 1559 / UNSC Resolution 1566 2005 UNSC Resolution 1583 / Sharm el-Sheikh Summit / Israeli disengagement from Gaza / Agreement on Movement and Access 2006 UNSC Resolution 1701 2007 Annapolis Conference 2010 Israeli–Palestinian peace talks 2013 Israeli–Palestinian peace talks v t e Protests in the 21st century Revolutions/ 

Uprisings Colour revolutions (2000s) Georgia (Rose) Kyrgyzstan (Tulip) Lebanon (Cedar) Ukraine (Orange) Arab Spring (2010s) Bahrain Egypt Libya Syria Tunisia Yemen Other Abkhazia Burkino Faso EDSA II EDSA III Euromaidan Second Intifada Second Kyrgyz Revolution Specific issues Anti-austerity Greece Ireland Italy Rome Sicily Social Portugal Spain 2012 in Asturias United Kingdom Anti-war Sri Lankan Civil War Canada War on Afghanistan War on Iraq Russia Arab Spring Algeria Djibouti Egypt Iraq 2011 2012–13 2015-16 Jordan Lebanon Mauritania Morocco Oman Saudi Arabia Sudan Tunisia Western Sahara Autonomy/ 

Independence Catalonia 2010 2012 2013 2014 2015 Crimea Southeastern Ukraine Iraqi Kurdistan 2009 in Turkey 2011 in Iraq 2011–12 in Turkey Palestine 2011 2012 Sahrawis Against elections Belarus (2006) Armenia (2008) Iran (2009) Moldova (2009) Russia (2011) Mexico (2012) South Korea (2012-13) Student Austria Bangladesh Chile 2006 2008 2011–13 Colombia Croatia Hong Kong 2012 2014 Ireland Netherlands Puerto Rico Quebec 2005 2012 South Africa Rhodes Must Fall FeesMustFall Taiwan 2014 2015 United Kingdom Other protests International Anti-Japanese protests 2005 2012 May Day 2009 2012 2013 2014 2015 Occupy movement National Albania Argentina 2001 Sep. 13, 2012 Nov. 8, 2012 Apr. 18, 2013 Nov. 13, 2014 Armenia 2011 2012 2013 2015 Azerbaijan Belarus 2006 2011 Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil 2013 2014 2015–16 Bulgaria Borisov's first cabinet Oresharski cabinet Burkinabé Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada 2010 Idle No More Chile Aysén Magallanes China 2011 Congo Ecuador 2012 2015 Estonia Ethiopia 2016 France 2005 2010 2015 Corsica Gabon Georgia 2007 2011 Hong Kong 2003 2005 2009–10 Jan 2010, Jan 2013 2014 Hungary 2006 2014 Iceland 2009 2016 India 2011 2012 Iran (2011–12) Iraq (2015–present) Israel Reserve soldiers "Social justice" Kazakhstan Lebanon 2006–08 2015–present Macedonia 2015 2016 Malawi Macau Malaysia Bersih HINDRAF Bersih 2.0 Bersih 3.0 People's Uprising Bersih 4.0 Mexico Moldova 2013 2015–16 Montenegro 2008 2015 Myanmar Nepal Northern Ireland Pakistan Long March Azadi March Inqilab March Philippines Romania, 2012–15 2012 Shale gas Roșia Montană Project Colectiv Russia 2005–08 2011–13 2014 Slovenia Taiwan 2006 Thailand 2010 2013–14 Turkey 2007 2013 Ukraine 2000–01 2013 United States Public employee Tea Party Wall Street Wisconsin Uzbekistan Venezuela 2007 2014–16 Zimbabwe 2016 v t e Post– Cold War conflicts in Asia South Asia Nepalese conflicts Civil War (1996–2006) Royal massacre (2001) Sri Lankan Civil War (1983–2009) Other Sri Lankan conflicts 1971 JVP Insurrection 1987–89 JVP Insurrection Kashmir conflict [1947–present] Rohingya insurgency in Western Myanmar [1947-present] Kargil War [1999] Jammu and Kashmir insurgency (1989–present) Insurgency in Northeast India (1964–present) Naxalite–Maoist insurgency (1967–present) Afghan Wars 1989–92 1992–96 1996–2001 2001–14 2015–present War in North-West Pakistan (2004–present) Balochistan conflict (2004–present) East Asia Taiwan Strait Crisis (1996) Korean dispute Maritime border incidents (1967–present) 2013 crisis Xinjiang conflict (1960s–present) Southeast Asia East Timorese conflicts Indonesian occupation (1975–99) 1999 crisis 2006 crisis Cambodian–Thai border dispute (2008–11) Other Indonesian conflicts Papua conflict (1969–present) Aceh insurgency (1976–2005) Burmese internal conflict (1947–present) Kachin (2011–present) Civil conflict in the Philippines CPP-NPA-NDF Moro Al-Ma'unah (2000-2001) Kampung Medan riots (2001) Philippine Drug War (2016-present) South Thailand insurgency (2004–present) Central Asia Tajikistani Civil War (1992–97) Kyrgyz Revolution (2010) Tajikistan Insurgency (2010–12) Western Asia 

(excluding 

South Caucasus) Iraqi conflicts Iraqi–Kurdish [1918–2003] Civil War [1994–97] War [2003–11] Post-War insurgency [2011–13] Civil War [2014–present] Israeli conflicts Israeli–Palestinian [1948–present] Intifada [2000–05] Gaza–Israel [2006–present] Israeli–Lebanese [1948–present] South Lebanon [1985–2000] Lebanon War [2006] Sinai insurgency (2011–present) Kurdish separatism in Iran KDPI insurgency (1989–96) Iran–PJAK conflict (2004–present) Yemeni Civil War (1994) Other insurgencies in Yemen al-Qaeda [1998–2015] Houthi [2004–2015] South Yemen [2009–15] Yemeni Crisis [2011–present] Coup d'état [2014–15] Civil War [2015] Bahraini uprising (2011) Syrian Civil War (2011–present) Regional spillover Civil conflict in Turkey [1976-80] Maoist insurgency DHKP/C insurgency PKK conflict Turkey–ISIL conflict Related topics War on Terror (2001–present) Arab Spring [2010–11] Arab Winter Colour revolutions European conflicts African conflicts Middle East conflicts Conflicts in the Americas v t e Israeli wars and conflicts Arab–Israeli War (1948–49) Reprisal operations (1951–56) Suez Crisis (1956) Six-Day War (1967) War of Attrition (1967–70) Yom Kippur War (1973) Operation Litani (1978) First Lebanon War (1982–85) South Lebanon conflict (1985–2000) First Intifada (1987–93) Second Intifada (2000–05) Second Lebanon War (2006) Gaza War (2008–09) Operation Pillar of Defense (2012) Israel–Gaza conflict (2014) Authority control GND : 4665525-6 (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.log.warn("Gadget \"teahouse\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"ReferenceTooltips\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"featured-articles-links\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");}); Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Second_Intifada oldid=742785605 " Categories : Second Intifada 2000s in the Palestinian territories Intifadas Riots and civil disorder in Israel Riots and civil disorder in the Palestinian National Authority Protests in the Palestinian territories Hidden categories: Articles with Turkish-language external links Articles with Wayback Machine links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2016 CS1 errors: dates Articles with dead external links from September 2014 CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown Pages with archiveurl citation errors CS1 uses Arabic-language script (ar) CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) Pages with citations lacking titles Pages with citations having bare URLs CS1 uses Hebrew-language script (he) Wikipedia pages under 30-500 editing restriction All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from September 2014 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2009 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2010 Use dmy dates from May 2016 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe ייִדיש 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 5 October 2016, at 19:40. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.loader.load(["ext.cite.a11y","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.action.view.postEdit","site","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.searchSuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.ReferenceTooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.DRN-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.refToolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.visualEditor.targetLoader","ext.eventLogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaEvents","ext.navigationTiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.centralNotice.geoIP","ext.centralNotice.startUp"]);}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set( { "wgPageParseReport": { "limitreport": { "cputime": "2.220", "walltime": "2.500", "ppvisitednodes": { "value": 14442, "limit": 1000000 }, "ppgeneratednodes": { "value": 0, "limit": 1500000 }, "postexpandincludesize": { "value": 872107, "limit": 2097152 }, "templateargumentsize": { "value": 50765, "limit": 2097152 }, "expansiondepth": { "value": 18, "limit": 40 }, "expensivefunctioncount": { "value": 16, "limit": 500 }, "entityaccesscount": { "value": 1, "limit": 400 }, "timingprofile": [ "100.00% 2016.008 1 -total", " 59.15% 1192.401 1 Template:Reflist", " 22.89% 461.441 122 Template:Cite_news", " 12.20% 245.899 67 Template:Cite_web", " 9.08% 183.046 27 Template:Navbox", " 7.15% 144.185 2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups", " 6.14% 123.860 9 Template:Fix", " 5.82% 117.391 31 Template:Cite_book", " 4.80% 96.691 1 Template:Israeli-Palestinian_conflict", " 4.61% 92.914 1 Template:Timeline_of_Intifadas" ] }, "scribunto": { "limitreport-timeusage": { "value": "1.046", "limit": "10.000" }, "limitreport-memusage": { "value": 6664891, "limit": 52428800 } }, "cachereport": { "origin": "mw1216", "timestamp": "20161018152907", "ttl": 2592000, "transientcontent": false } } } );}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgBackendResponseTime":86,"wgHostname":"mw1171"});});