Derry - Wikipedia document.documentElement.className = document.documentElement.className.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" ); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgCanonicalNamespace":"","wgCanonicalSpecialPageName":false,"wgNamespaceNumber":0,"wgPageName":"Derry","wgTitle":"Derry","wgCurRevisionId":742290939,"wgRevisionId":742290939,"wgArticleId":9055,"wgIsArticle":true,"wgIsRedirect":false,"wgAction":"view","wgUserName":null,"wgUserGroups":["*"],"wgCategories":["All articles with dead external links","Articles with dead external links from September 2010","Articles with Wayback Machine links","Articles with dead external links from May 2016","Articles with dead external links from September 2016","Articles with permanently dead external links","CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter","Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages","Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages","Use dmy dates from August 2014","EngvarB from August 2014","Articles containing Scots-language text","Articles containing Irish-language text","Coordinates on Wikidata","Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2010","All articles with unsourced statements","Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009","Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012","Articles that mention track gauge 1600 mm","Articles that mention track gauge 914 mm","Articles that mention track gauge 1435 mm","Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011","Vague or ambiguous time from October 2011","Articles with DMOZ links","Derry","County Londonderry","County towns in Northern Ireland","University towns in the United Kingdom","Fortified settlements","Port cities and towns in Northern Ireland"],"wgBreakFrames":false,"wgPageContentLanguage":"en","wgPageContentModel":"wikitext","wgSeparatorTransformTable":["",""],"wgDigitTransformTable":["",""],"wgDefaultDateFormat":"dmy","wgMonthNames":["","January","February","March","April","May","June","July","August","September","October","November","December"],"wgMonthNamesShort":["","Jan","Feb","Mar","Apr","May","Jun","Jul","Aug","Sep","Oct","Nov","Dec"],"wgRelevantPageName":"Derry","wgRelevantArticleId":9055,"wgRequestId":"WAovGApAMFoAALMtREUAAABC","wgIsProbablyEditable":false,"wgRestrictionEdit":["autoconfirmed"],"wgRestrictionMove":["sysop"],"wgWikiEditorEnabledModules":{"toolbar":true,"dialogs":true,"preview":false,"publish":false},"wgBetaFeaturesFeatures":[],"wgMediaViewerOnClick":true,"wgMediaViewerEnabledByDefault":true,"wgVisualEditor":{"pageLanguageCode":"en","pageLanguageDir":"ltr","usePageImages":true,"usePageDescriptions":true},"wgPreferredVariant":"en","wgMFDisplayWikibaseDescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgRelatedArticles":null,"wgRelatedArticlesUseCirrusSearch":true,"wgRelatedArticlesOnlyUseCirrusSearch":false,"wgULSCurrentAutonym":"English","wgNoticeProject":"wikipedia","wgCentralNoticeCookiesToDelete":[],"wgCentralNoticeCategoriesUsingLegacy":["Fundraising","fundraising"],"wgCategoryTreePageCategoryOptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgFlaggedRevsParams":{"tags":{"status":{"levels":1,"quality":2,"pristine":3}}},"wgStableRevisionId":null,"wgCoordinates":{"lat":54.9958,"lon":-7.3074},"wgWikibaseItemId":"Q163584","wgCentralAuthMobileDomain":false,"wgVisualEditorToolbarScrollOffset":0,"wgEditSubmitButtonLabelPublish":false});mw.loader.state({"ext.globalCssJs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","user.cssprefs":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"loading","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediaBadges":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonPrint":"ready","mediawiki.sectionAnchor":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.user":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.options@0j3lz3q",function($,jQuery,require,module){mw.user.options.set({"variant":"en"});});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@1dqfd7l",function ( $, jQuery, require, module ) { mw.user.tokens.set({"editToken":"+\\","patrolToken":"+\\","watchToken":"+\\","csrfToken":"+\\"});/*@nomin*/; });mw.loader.load(["mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.legacy.wikibits","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.init","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","skins.vector.js"]);}); Derry From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation , search For other places with similar names, see Derry (disambiguation) and Londonderry (disambiguation) . Derry/Londonderry Scots : Derrie/Lunnonderrie Irish : Doire/Doire Cholmcille Maiden City 

From top, left to right: Austin's Department Store, Derry's Walls, Free Derry Corner , Peace Bridge across the River Foyle , a view of Derry at night, Diamond War Memorial , 'Hands Across the Divide' sculpture. 

Vita Veritas Victoria 

"Life, Truth, Victory" 

(Adapted from a decoration on the Craigavon Bridge ) Derry/Londonderry shown within Northern Ireland Population Derry 

85,016 

Urban 

93,512 

Metro 

237,000 

2008 est. Irish grid reference C434166 District Derry and Strabane District Council County County Londonderry Country Northern Ireland Sovereign state United Kingdom Post town LONDONDERRY [1] Postcode district BT47 

BT48 Dialling code 028 Police Northern Ireland Fire Northern Ireland Ambulance Northern Ireland EU Parliament Northern Ireland UK Parliament Foyle NI Assembly Foyle Website www.derrycityandstrabanedistrict.com List of places UK Northern Ireland County Londonderry 

Coordinates : 54°59′45″N 7°18′27″W ﻿ / ﻿ 54.9958°N 7.3074°W ﻿ / 54.9958; -7.3074 

Derry ( / ˈ d ɛ r ɪ / [2] ), officially Londonderry ( / ˈ l ʌ n d ə n ˌ d ɛ r ɪ / [2] ), is the second-largest city in Northern Ireland [3] [4] and the fourth-largest city on the island of Ireland. [5] The name Derry is an anglicisation of the Irish name Daire or Doire meaning "oak grove". [6] [7] In 1613, the city was granted a Royal Charter by King James I and gained the "London" prefix to reflect the funding of its construction by the London guilds. While the city is more usually known colloquially as Derry, [8] [9] Londonderry is also commonly used and remains the legal name. 

The old walled city lies on the west bank of the River Foyle , which is spanned by two road bridges and one footbridge. The city now covers both banks (Cityside on the west and Waterside on the east). The population of the city was 83,652 at the 2001 Census, while the Derry Urban Area had a population of 90,736. [10] The district administered by Derry City and Strabane District Council contains both Londonderry Port and City of Derry Airport . 

Derry is close to the border with County Donegal , with which it has had a close link for many centuries. The person traditionally seen as the founder of the original Derry is Saint Colmcille , a holy man from Tír Chonaill , the old name for almost all of modern County Donegal, of which the west bank of the Foyle was a part before 1610. [11] 

In 2013, Derry was the inaugural UK City of Culture , having been awarded the title in 2010. [12] [13] 

Contents 1 Name 2 City walls 3 History 3.1 Early history 3.2 Plantation 3.3 17th-century upheavals 3.4 18th and 19th centuries 3.5 Early 20th century 3.5.1 World War I 3.5.2 Partition 3.5.3 World War II 3.6 Late 20th century 3.6.1 1950s and 1960s 3.6.2 The Civil Rights Movement 3.7 The Troubles 4 Governance 4.1 Coat of arms and motto 5 Geography 5.1 Climate 6 Demography 6.1 Protestant minority 7 Economy 7.1 History 7.2 Inward investment 7.3 Shopping 8 Landmarks 9 Transport 9.1 Buses 9.2 Air 9.3 Railways 9.3.1 Railway history 9.3.1.1 19th and 20th century growth 9.3.1.2 20th century decline 9.4 Road network 9.5 Sea 9.6 Inland waterways 10 Education 11 Sports 11.1 Association football 11.2 Gaelic football 11.3 Boxing 11.4 Rugby Union 11.5 Basketball 11.6 Cricket 11.7 Golf 12 Culture 12.1 Media 12.2 Night-life 12.3 Events 12.4 References in popular music 13 Notable people 14 See also 15 References 16 External links 

Name Main article: Derry/Londonderry name dispute Road sign in Northern Ireland with the reference to London obscured Road signs in the Republic of Ireland ( County Donegal shown) use Derry and the Irish Doire 

According to the city's Royal Charter of 10 April 1662, the official name is "Londonderry". This was reaffirmed in a High Court decision in 2007 when Derry City Council sought guidance on the procedure for effecting a name change. [14] [15] The council had changed its name from "Londonderry City Council" to "Derry City Council" in 1984; [16] the court case was seeking clarification as to whether this had also changed the name of the city. The decision of the court was that it had not but it was clarified that the correct procedure to do so was via a petition to the Privy Council . [17] Derry City Council since started this process and were involved in conducting an equality impact assessment report (EQIA). [18] Firstly it held an opinion poll of district residents in 2009, which reported that 75% of Catholics and 77% of Nationalists found the proposed change acceptable, compared to 6% of Protestants and 8% of Unionists. [19] Then the EQIA held two consultative forums, and solicited comments from the general public on whether or not the city should have its name changed to Derry. [20] A total of 12,136 comments were received, of which 3,108 were broadly in favour of the proposal, and 9,028 opposed to it. [20] On 23 July 2015, the council voted in favour of a motion to change the official name of the city to Derry and to write to Mark H. Durkan , Northern Ireland Minister of the Environment, to ask how the change could be effected. [21] 

Despite the official name, the city is more usually known as "Derry", [8] [9] which is an anglicisation of the Irish Daire or Doire , and translates as " oak -grove/oak-wood". The name derives from the settlement's earliest references, Daire Calgaich ("oak-grove of Calgach"). [22] The name was changed from Derry in 1613 during the Plantation of Ulster to reflect the establishment of the city by the London guilds. [23] [24] 

The name "Derry" is preferred by nationalists and it is broadly used throughout Northern Ireland's Catholic community, [25] as well as that of the Republic of Ireland, whereas many unionists prefer "Londonderry"; [26] however in everyday conversation Derry is used by most Protestant residents of the city. [27] Linguist Kevin McCafferty argues that "It is not, strictly speaking, correct that Northern Ireland Catholics call it Derry, while Protestants use the Londonderry form, although this pattern has become more common locally since the mid-1980s, when the city council changed its name by dropping the prefix". In McCafferty's survey of language use in the city, "only very few interviewees—all Protestants—use the official form". [28] 

Apart from the name of Derry City Council, the city is usually [25] known as Londonderry in official use within the UK. In the Republic of Ireland, the city and county are almost always referred to as Derry, on maps, in the media and in conversation. [29] In April 2009, however, the Republic of Ireland's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Micheál Martin , announced that Irish passport holders who were born there could record either Derry or Londonderry as their place of birth. [30] Whereas official road signs in the Republic use the name Derry, those in Northern Ireland bear Londonderry (sometimes abbreviated to "L'Derry"), although some of these have been defaced with the reference to London obscured. [31] Usage varies among local organisations, with both names being used. Examples are City of Derry Airport , City of Derry Rugby Club , Derry City FC and the Protestant Apprentice Boys of Derry , as opposed to Londonderry Port , Londonderry YMCA Rugby Club and Londonderry Chamber of Commerce. [32] Most companies within the city choose local area names such as Pennyburn, Rosemount or "Foyle" from the River Foyle to avoid alienating the other community. Londonderry railway station is often referred to as Waterside railway station within the city but is called Derry/Londonderry at other stations. The council changed the name of the local government district covering the city to Derry on 7 May 1984, consequently renaming itself Derry City Council. [33] This did not change the name of the city, although the city is coterminous with the district, and in law the city council is also the "Corporation of Londonderry" or, more formally, the "Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of the City of Londonderry". [34] The form "Londonderry" is used for the post town by the Royal Mail , [28] however use of Derry will still ensure delivery. 

The city is also nicknamed the Maiden City by virtue of the fact that its walls were never breached despite being besieged on three separate occasions in the 17th century, the most notable being the Siege of Derry of 1688-89. [35] It is also nicknamed Stroke City by local broadcaster, Gerry Anderson , due to the 'politically correct' use of the oblique notation Derry/Londonderry [25] (which appellation has itself been used by BBC Television [36] ). A recent addition to the landscape has been the erection of several large stone columns on main roads into the city welcoming drivers, euphemistically, to "the walled city". 

The name Derry is very much in popular use throughout Ireland for the naming of places, and there are at least six towns bearing that name and at least a further 79 places. The word Derry often forms part of the place name, for example Derrybeg, Derryboy, Derrylea and Derrymore. 

The names Derry and Londonderry are not limited to Ireland. There is a town called Derry situated right beside another town called Londonderry in New Hampshire in the United States. There are also Londonderrys in Yorkshire , England, in Vermont , United States, in Nova Scotia , Canada, and in northern and eastern Australia. Londonderry Island is situated off Tierra del Fuego in Chile. 

Derry is also a fictional town in Maine , United States, used in some Stephen King novels. [37] City walls 

A portion of the city walls of Derry. Bishops Street Gate 

Derry is the only remaining completely intact walled city in Ireland and one of the finest examples of a walled city in Europe. [38] [39] [40] The walls constitute the largest monument in State care in Northern Ireland and, as the last walled city to be built in Europe, stands as the most complete and spectacular. [41] 

The Walls were built in 1613–1619 by The Honourable The Irish Society as defences for early 17th century settlers from England and Scotland. The Walls, which are approximately 1 mile (1.6 km) in circumference and which vary in height and width between 3.7 and 10.7 metres (12 and 35 feet), are completely intact and form a walkway around the inner city. They provide a unique promenade to view the layout of the original town which still preserves its Renaissance style street plan. The four original gates to the Walled City are Bishop's Gate, Ferryquay Gate, Butcher Gate and Shipquay Gate. Three further gates were added later, Magazine Gate, Castle Gate and New Gate, making seven gates in total. Historic buildings within the walls include the 1633 Gothic cathedral of St Columb , the Apprentice Boys Memorial Hall and the courthouse. 

It is one of the few cities in Europe that never saw its fortifications breached, withstanding several sieges including one in 1689 which lasted 105 days, hence the city's nickname, The Maiden City. [42] History Main article: History of Derry St Columb's Cathedral Early history 

Derry is one of the oldest continuously inhabited places in Ireland. [43] The earliest historical references date to the 6th century when a monastery was founded there by St Columba or Colmcille, a famous saint from what is now County Donegal , but for thousands of years before that people had been living in the vicinity. 

Before leaving Ireland to spread Christianity elsewhere, Colmcille founded a monastery at Derry (which was then called Doire Calgach ), on the west bank of the Foyle. According to oral and documented history, the site was granted to Colmcille by a local king. [44] The monastery then remained in the hands of the federation of Columban churches who regarded Colmcille as their spiritual mentor. The year 546 is often referred to as the date that the original settlement was founded. However, it is now accepted by historians that this was an erroneous date assigned by medieval chroniclers. [43] It is accepted that between the 6th century and the 11th century, Derry was known primarily as a monastic settlement. [43] 

The town became strategically more significant during the Tudor conquest of Ireland and came under frequent attack. During O'Doherty's Rebellion in 1608 it was attacked by Sir Cahir O'Doherty , Irish chieftain of Inishowen , who burnt much of the town and killed the governor George Paulet . [45] The soldier and statesman Sir Henry Docwra made vigorous efforts to develop the town, earning the reputation of being " the founder of Derry"; but he was accused of failing to prevent the O'Doherty attack, and returned to England. Plantation 

What became the City of Derry was part of the relatively new County Donegal up until 1610. [46] In that year, the west bank of the future city was transferred by the English Crown to The Honourable The Irish Society [46] and was combined with County Coleraine , part of County Antrim and a large portion of County Tyrone to form County Londonderry . Planters organised by London livery companies through The Honourable The Irish Society arrived in the 17th century as part of the Plantation of Ulster , and rebuilt the town with high walls to defend it from Irish insurgents who opposed the plantation. The aim was to settle Ulster with a population supportive of the Crown. [24] It was then renamed "Londonderry". 

This city was the first planned city in Ireland: it was begun in 1613, with the walls being completed in 1619, at a cost of £10,757. [47] The central diamond within a walled city with four gates was thought to be a good design for defence. The grid pattern chosen was subsequently much copied in the colonies of British North America. [48] The charter initially defined the city as extending three Irish miles (about 6.1 km) from the centre. 

The modern city preserves the 17th century layout of four main streets radiating from a central Diamond to four gateways – Bishop's Gate, Ferryquay Gate, Shipquay Gate and Butcher's Gate. The city's oldest surviving building was also constructed at this time: the 1633 Plantation Gothic cathedral of St Columb . In the porch of the cathedral is a stone that records completion with the inscription: "If stones could speake, then London's prayse should sound, Who built this church and cittie from the grounde." [49] 17th-century upheavals 

During the 1640s, the city suffered in the Wars of the Three Kingdoms , which began with the Irish Rebellion of 1641 , when the Gaelic Irish insurgents made a failed attack on the city. In 1649 the city and its garrison, which supported the republican Parliament in London, were besieged by Scottish Presbyterian forces loyal to King Charles I . The Parliamentarians besieged in Derry were relieved by a strange alliance of Roundhead troops under George Monck and the Irish Catholic general Owen Roe O'Neill . These temporary allies were soon fighting each other again however, after the landing in Ireland of the New Model Army in 1649. The war in Ulster was finally brought to an end when the Parliamentarians crushed the Irish Catholic Ulster army at the Battle of Scarrifholis , near Letterkenny in nearby County Donegal , in 1650. 

During the Glorious Revolution , only Derry and nearby Enniskillen had a Protestant garrison by November 1688. An army of around 1,200 men, mostly " Redshanks " ( Highlanders ), under Alexander Macdonnell, 3rd Earl of Antrim, was slowly organised (they set out on the week William of Orange landed in England). When they arrived on 7 December 1688 the gates were closed against them and the Siege of Derry began. In April 1689, King James came to the city and summoned it to surrender. The King was rebuffed and the siege lasted until the end of July with the arrival of a relief ship. 18th and 19th centuries Map of County Londonderry 1837 

The city was rebuilt in the 18th century with many of its fine Georgian style houses still surviving. The city's first bridge across the River Foyle was built in 1790. During the 18th and 19th centuries the port became an important embarkation point for Irish emigrants setting out for North America. Some of these founded the colonies of Derry and Londonderry in the state of New Hampshire . 

Also during the 19th century, it became a destination for migrants fleeing areas more severely affected by the Irish Potato Famine . [50] [51] One of the most notable shipping lines was the McCorkell Line operated by Wm. McCorkell Co. Ltd. from 1778. [52] The McCorkell's most famous ship was the Minnehaha, which was known as the "Green Yacht from Derry". [52] Early 20th century World War I 

The city contributed over 5,000 men to the British Army from Catholic and Protestant families. Partition The war memorial in The Diamond, erected 1927 [53] 

During the Irish War of Independence , the area was rocked by sectarian violence, partly prompted by the guerilla war raging between the Irish Republican Army and British forces, but also influenced by economic and social pressures. By mid-1920 there was severe sectarian rioting in the city. [54] [55] Many lives were lost and in addition many Catholics and Protestants were expelled from their homes during this communal unrest. After a week's violence, a truce was negotiated by local politicians on both unionist and republican sides. 

In 1921, following the Anglo-Irish Treaty and the Partition of Ireland , it unexpectedly became a 'border city', separated from much of its traditional economic hinterland in County Donegal . World War II 

During World War II , the city played an important part in the Battle of the Atlantic . [56] Ships from the Royal Navy , the Royal Canadian Navy , and other Allied navies were stationed in the city and the United States military established a base. Over 20,000 Royal Navy , 10,000 Royal Canadian Navy , and 6,000 American Navy personnel were stationed in the city during the war. [57] The establishment of the American presence in the city was the result of a secret agreement between the Americans and the British before the Americans entered the war. [58] [59] It was the first American naval base in Europe and the terminal for American convoys en route to Europe. 

The reason for such a high degree of military and naval activity was self-evident: Derry was the United Kingdom's westernmost port; indeed, the city was the westernmost Allied port in Europe: thus, Derry was a crucial jumping-off point, together with Glasgow and Liverpool, for the shipping convoys that ran between Europe and North America. The large numbers of military personnel in Derry substantially altered the character of the city, bringing in some outside colour to the local area, as well as some cosmopolitan and economic buoyancy during these years. Several airfields were built in the outlying regions of the city at this time, Maydown, Eglinton and Ballykelly. RAF Eglinton went on to become City of Derry Airport . 

The city contributed significant number of men to the war effort throughout the services, most notably the 500 men in the 9th (Londonderry) Heavy Anti-Aircraft Regiment, known as the 'Derry Boys'. This regiment served in North Africa, the Sudan, Italy and mainland UK. Many others served in the Merchant Navy taking part in the convoys that supplied the UK and Russia during the war. 

The border location of the city, and influx of trade from the military convoys allowed for significant smuggling operations to develop in the city. 

At the conclusion of the Second World War, eventually some 60 U-boats of the German Kriegsmarine ended in the city's harbour at Lisahally after their surrender. [60] The initial surrender was attended by Admiral Sir Max Horton , Commander-in-Chief of the Western Approaches , and Sir Basil Brooke , third Prime Minister of Northern Ireland . [58] Late 20th century 1950s and 1960s 

The city languished after the second world war, with unemployment and development stagnating. A large campaign, led by the University for Derry Committee , to have Northern Ireland's second university located in the city, ended in failure. The Civil Rights Movement 

Derry was a focal point for the nascent civil rights movement in Northern Ireland. Bogside area viewed from the walls 

Catholics were discriminated against under Unionist government in Northern Ireland , both politically and economically. [61] [62] [63] [64] In the late 1960s the city became the flashpoint of disputes about institutional gerrymandering . Political scientist John Whyte explains that: 

All the accusations of gerrymandering, practically all the complaints about housing and regional policy, and a disproportionate amount of the charges about public and private employment come from this area. The area – which consisted of Counties Tyrone and Fermanagh, Londonderry County Borough, and portions of Counties Londonderry and Armagh – had less than a quarter of the total population of Northern Ireland yet generated not far short of three-quarters of the complaints of discrimination...The unionist government must bear its share of responsibility. It put through the original gerrymander which underpinned so many of the subsequent malpractices, and then, despite repeated protests, did nothing to stop those malpractices continuing. The most serious charge against the Northern Ireland government is not that it was directly responsible for widespread discrimination, but that it allowed discrimination on such a scale over a substantial segment of Northern Ireland. [65] 

A civil rights demonstration in 1968 led by the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association was banned by the Government and blocked using force by the Royal Ulster Constabulary . [64] The events that followed the August 1969 Apprentice Boys parade resulted in the Battle of the Bogside , when Catholic rioters fought the police, leading to widespread civil disorder in Northern Ireland and is often dated as the starting point of the Troubles . 

On Sunday 30 January 1972, 13 unarmed civilians were shot dead by British paratroopers during a civil rights march in the Bogside area. Another 13 were wounded and one further man later died of his wounds. This event came to be known as Bloody Sunday . The Troubles Main article: The Troubles in Derry " Free Derry Corner " at the corner of Lecky Road and Fahan Street in the Bogside. The slogan was first painted in January 1969 by John Casey. 

The conflict which became known as the Troubles is widely regarded as having started in Derry with the Battle of the Bogside. The Civil Rights movement had also been very active in the city. In the early 1970s the city was heavily militarised and there was widespread civil unrest. Several districts in the city constructed barricades to control access and prevent the forces of the state from entering. 

Violence eased towards the end of the Troubles in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Irish journalist Ed Maloney claims in "The Secret History of the IRA" that republican leaders there negotiated a de facto ceasefire in the city as early as 1991. Whether this is true or not, the city did see less bloodshed by this time than Belfast or other localities. 

The city was visited by a killer whale in November 1977 at the height of the Troubles; it was dubbed Dopey Dick by the thousands who came from miles around to see him. [66] Governance 

The local district council is Derry City Council , which consists of five electoral areas: Cityside, Northland, Rural, Shantallow and Waterside . The council of 30 members is re-elected every four years. As of the 2011 election, 14 Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) members, ten Sinn Féin , five Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), and one Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) make up the council. [ needs update ] The mayor and deputy mayor are elected annually by councillors. 

The local authority boundaries correspond to the Foyle constituency of the Parliament of the United Kingdom and the Foyle constituency of the Northern Ireland Assembly . In European Parliament elections, it is part of the Northern Ireland constituency . Coat of arms and motto Derry's coat of arms 

The devices on the city's arms are a skeleton and a three-towered castle on a black field, with the chief or top third of the shield depicting the arms of the City of London : a red cross and sword on white. In the centre of the cross is a gold harp. The blazon of the arms is as follows: 

Sable, a human skeleton Or seated upon a mossy stone proper and in dexter chief a castle triple towered argent on a chief also argent a cross gules thereon a harp or and in the first quarter a sword erect gules [67] 

According to documents in the College of Arms in London and the Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland in Dublin, the arms of the city were confirmed in 1613 by Daniel Molyneux, Ulster King of Arms . [43] The College of Arms document states that the original arms of the City of Derry were ye picture of death (or a skeleton) on a moissy stone in ye dexter point a castle and that upon grant of a charter of incorporation and the renaming of the city as Londonderry in that year the first mayor had requested the addition of a "chief of London". [68] [69] 

Theories have been advanced as to the meaning of the "old" arms of Derry, before the addition of the chief bearing the arms of the City of London: A suggestion has been made that the castle is related to an early 14th-century castle in nearby Greencastle belonging to the Anglo-Norman Earl of Ulster Richard de Burgh . [43] The most popular theory about the skeleton is that it is that of a Norman De Burgh knight who was starved to death in the castle dungeons in 1332 on the orders of his cousin the above-mentioned Earl of Ulster . [43] Another explanation put forward was that it depicted Cahir O'Doherty (Sir Charles O'Dogherty), who was put to death after Derry was invested by the English army in 1608. During the days of Gerrymandering and discrimination against the Catholic population of Derry, Derry's Roman Catholics often used to claim in dark wit that the skeleton was a local waiting for help from the council bureaucracy. [43] 

In 1979, Londonderry City Council, as it was then known, commissioned a report into the city's arms and insignia, as part of the design process for an heraldic badge . The published report found that there was no basis for any of the popular explanations for the skeleton and that it was "purely symbolic and does not refer to any identifiable person". [70] 

The 1613 records of the arms depicted a harp in the centre of the cross, but this was omitted from later depictions of the city arms, and in the Letters Patent confirming the arms to Londonderry Corporation in 1952. [71] In 2002 Derry City Council applied to the College of Arms to have the harp restored to the city arms, and Garter and Norroy Ulster Kings of Arms accepted the 17th century evidence, issuing letters patent to that effect in 2003. [67] 

The motto attached to the coat of arms reads in Latin, "Vita, Veritas, Victoria". This translates into English as, "Life, Truth, Victory". [43] 

The councillors elected in 2014 for the city are: Name Party Sandra Duffy Sinn Féin Tony Hassan Sinn Féin Elisha McCallion Sinn Féin Mickey Cooper Sinn Féin Eric McGinley Sinn Féin Kevin Campbell Sinn Féin Patricia Logue Sinn Féin Colly Kelly Sinn Féin Christopher Jackson Sinn Féin Angela Dobbins SDLP Brian Tierney SDLP John Boyle SDLP Shauna Cusack SDLP Seán Carr SDLP Gerard Diver SDLP Martin Reilly SDLP Dermot Quigley Independent Darren O'Reilly Independent Gary Donnelly Independent Hilary McClintock DUP Drew Thompson DUP David Ramsey DUP Mary Hamilton UUP Geography OpenstreetMap mapping The Craigavon Bridge . 

Derry is characterised by its distinctively hilly topography. [72] The River Foyle forms a deep valley as it flows through the city, making Derry a place of very steep streets and sudden, startling views. The original walled city of Londonderry lies on a hill on the west bank of the River Foyle. In the past, the river branched and enclosed this wooded hill as an island; over the centuries, however, the western branch of the river dried up and became a low-lying and boggy district that is now called the Bogside. [73] 

Today, modern Derry extends considerably north and west of the city walls and east of the river. The half of the city the west of the Foyle is known as the Cityside and the area east is called the Waterside . The Cityside and Waterside are connected by the Craigavon Bridge and Foyle Bridge , and by a foot bridge in the centre of the city called Peace Bridge . The district also extends into rural areas to the southeast of the city. 

This much larger city, however, remains characterised by the often extremely steep hills that form much of its terrain on both sides of the river. A notable exception to this lies on the north-eastern edge of the city, on the shores of Lough Foyle , where large expanses of sea and mudflats were reclaimed in the middle of the 19th century. Today, these slob lands are protected from the sea by miles of sea walls and dikes. The area is an internationally important bird sanctuary, ranked among the top 30 wetland sites in the UK. [74] 

Other important nature reserves lie at Ness Country Park, [75] 10 miles (16 km) east of Derry; and at Prehen Wood, [76] within the city's south-eastern suburbs. Climate 

Derry has, like most of Ireland, a temperate maritime climate [77] according to the Köppen climate classification system. The nearest official Met Office Weather Station for which climate data is available is Carmoney, [78] just west of City of Derry Airport and about 5 miles (8 km) north east of the city centre. However, observations ceased in 2004 and the nearest Weather Station is currently Ballykelly, due 12 miles (19 km) east north east. [79] Typically, 27 nights of the year will report an air frost at Ballykelly, and at least 1 mm of precipitation will be reported on 170 days (1981–2010 averages). 

The lowest temperature recorded at Carmoney was −11.0 °C (12.2 °F) on 27 December 1995. [80] Climate data for Ballykelly SAMOS ( Derry Airport 1981–2010) Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year Average high °C (°F) 8.0 

(46.4) 8.2 

(46.8) 10.1 

(50.2) 12.1 

(53.8) 15 

(59) 17.0 

(62.6) 18.9 

(66) 18.5 

(65.3) 16.7 

(62.1) 13.5 

(56.3) 10.2 

(50.4) 8 

(46) 13.02 

(55.41) Average low °C (°F) 2.2 

(36) 2.1 

(35.8) 3.5 

(38.3) 4.8 

(40.6) 7 

(45) 9.7 

(49.5) 11.6 

(52.9) 11.4 

(52.5) 9.8 

(49.6) 7.2 

(45) 4.5 

(40.1) 2.5 

(36.5) 6.36 

(43.48) Average precipitation mm (inches) 83.5 

(3.287) 62.7 

(2.469) 69.8 

(2.748) 55.2 

(2.173) 51.2 

(2.016) 56.1 

(2.209) 66.1 

(2.602) 75.3 

(2.965) 68.7 

(2.705) 89.0 

(3.504) 86.7 

(3.413) 88.4 

(3.48) 852.6 

(33.567) Average precipitation days (≥ 1 mm) 17 13 16 12 12 11 13 13 13 16 19 15 170 Mean monthly sunshine hours 52.3 72.4 100.9 155.0 202.7 161.4 140.4 141.1 119.6 102.5 57.9 37.7 1,343.9 Source: MetOffice [81] Demography Ebrington Square 

Derry Urban Area (DUA), including the city and the neighbouring settlements of Culmore , Newbuildings and Strathfoyle , is classified as a city by the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (NISRA) since its population exceeds 75,000. On census day (27 March 2011) there were 105,066 people living in Derry Urban Area . Of these, 27% were aged under 16 years and 14% were aged 60 and over; 49% of the population were male and 51% were female; 75% were from a Roman Catholic background and 23% (up three per cent from 2001) were from a Protestant background. [82] 

The mid-2006 population estimate for the wider Derry City Council area was 107,300. [83] Population growth in 2005/06 was driven by natural change, with net out-migration of approximately 100 people. [83] 

The city was one of the few in Ireland to experience an increase in population during the Irish Potato Famine as migrants came to it from other, more heavily affected areas. [50] Protestant minority "No Surrender" mural outside city wall, taken in 2004 

Concerns have been raised by both communities over the increasingly divided nature of the city. There were about 17,000 Protestants on the west bank of the River Foyle in 1971. [84] The proportion rapidly declined during the 1970s; [85] the 2011 census recorded 3,169 Protestants on the west bank, compared to 54,976 Catholics, [86] and it is feared that the city could become permanently divided. [87] [88] 

However, concerted efforts have been made by local community, church and political leaders from both traditions to redress the problem. A conference to bring together key actors and promote tolerance was held in October 2006. [89] The Rt Rev. Dr Ken Good, the Church of Ireland Bishop of Derry and Raphoe , said he was happy living on the cityside. "I feel part of it. It is my city and I want to encourage other Protestants to feel exactly the same", he said. [89] 

Support for Protestants in the district has been strong from the former SDLP city Mayor Helen Quigley . Cllr Quigley has made inclusion and tolerance key themes of her mayoralty. The Mayor Helen Quigley said it is time for "everyone to take a stand to stop the scourge of sectarian and other assaults in the city." [90] Economy Du Pont facility at Maydown History 

The economy of the district was based significantly on the textile industry until relatively recently. For many years women were often the sole wage earners working in the shirt factories while the men predominantly in comparison had high levels of unemployment. [91] This led to significant male emigration. [92] The history of shirt making in the city dates back as far as 1831 and is said to have been started by William Scott and his family who first exported shirts to Glasgow . [93] Within 50 years, shirt making in the city was the most prolific in the UK with garments being exported all over the world. It was known so well that the industry received a mention in Das Kapital by Karl Marx , when discussing the factory system: 

The shirt factory of Messrs. Tille at Londonderry, which employs 1,000 operatives in the factory itself, and 9,000 people spread up and down the country and working in their own houses. [94] 

The industry reached its peak in the 1920s employing around 18,000 people. [43] In modern times however the textile industry declined due to in most part cheaper Asian wages. [95] 

A long-term foreign employer in the area is Du Pont , which has been based at Maydown since 1958, its first European production facility. [96] Originally Neoprene was manufactured at Maydown and subsequently followed by Hypalon . More recently Lycra and Kevlar production units were active. [97] Thanks to a healthy worldwide demand for Kevlar which is made at the plant, the facility recently undertook a £40 million upgrade to expand its global Kevlar production. Du Pont has stated that contributing factors to its continued commitment to Maydown are "low labour costs, excellent communications, and tariff-free, easy access to the Britain and European continent." Inward investment Seagate production facility 

In the last 15 years there has been a drive to increase inward investment in the city, more recently concentrating on digital industries. Currently the three largest private-sector employers are American firms. [98] Economic successes have included call centres and a large investment by Seagate , which has operated a factory in the Springtown Industrial Estate since 1993. Seagate currently employs over 1,000 people, producing more than half of the company's total requirement for hard drive read-write heads. 

A controversial new employer in the area was Raytheon Systems Limited , a software division of the American defence contractor, which was set up in Derry in 1999. [99] Although some of the local people welcomed the jobs boost, others in the area objected to the jobs being provided by a firm involved heavily in the arms trade . [100] Following four years of protest by the Foyle Ethical Investment Campaign, in 2004 Derry City Council passed a motion declaring the district a "A 'No – Go' Area for the Arms Trade", [101] and in 2006 its offices were briefly occupied by anti-war protestors who became known as the Raytheon 9 . [102] In 2009, the company announced that it was not renewing its lease when it expired in 2010 and was looking for a new location for its operations. [103] 

Significant multinational employers in the region include Firstsource of India, DuPont , INVISTA , Stream International, Seagate Technology , Perfecseal, NTL , Raytheon and Northbrook Technology of the United States, Arntz Belting and Invision Software of Germany, and Homeloan Management of the UK. Major local business employers include Desmonds, Northern Ireland's largest privately owned company, manufacturing and sourcing garments, E I Engineering, St. Brendan's Irish Cream Liqueur and McCambridge Duffy, one of the largest insolvency practices in the UK. [104] 

Even though the city provides cheap labour by standards in Western Europe, critics have noted that the grants offered by the Northern Ireland Industrial Development Board have helped land jobs for the area that only last as long as the funding lasts. [105] This was reflected in questions to the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Richard Needham , in 1990. [106] It was noted that it cost £30,000 to create one job in an American firm in Northern Ireland. 

Critics of investment decisions affecting the district often point to the decision to build a new university building in nearby (predominantly Protestant) Coleraine rather than developing the Ulster University Magee Campus . Another major government decision affecting the city was the decision to create the new town of Craigavon outside Belfast, which again was detrimental to the development of the city. Even in October 2005, there was perceived bias against the comparatively impoverished North West of the province, with a major civil service job contract going to Belfast. Mark Durkan , the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) leader and Member of Parliament (MP) for Foyle was quoted in the Belfast Telegraph as saying: 

The fact is there has been consistent under-investment in the North West and a reluctance on the part of the Civil Service to see or support anything west of the Bann, except when it comes to rate increases, then they treat us equally. 

In July 2005, the Irish Minister for Finance, Brian Cowen , called for a joint task force to drive economic growth in the cross border region. This would have implications for Counties Londonderry, Tyrone, and Donegal across the border. Shopping Austins department store 

The city is the north west's foremost shopping district, housing two large shopping centres along with numerous shop packed streets serving much of the greater county, as well as Tyrone and Donegal . While retail developments in Letterkenny have lessened cross-border traffic from north County Donegal, [ citation needed ] the weakness of the pound sterling over the course of 2009 made border towns such as Derry attractive to shoppers from south of the border. [107] [108] 

The city centre has two main shopping centres; the Foyleside Shopping Centre which has 45 stores and 1430 parking spaces, and the Richmond Centre , which has 39 retail units. The Quayside Shopping Centre also serves the city-side and there is also Lisnagelvin Shopping Centre in the Waterside. These centres, as well as local-run businesses, feature numerous national and international stores. A recent addition was the Crescent Link Retail Park located in the Waterside with many international chain stores, including Homebase, Currys PC World (stores combined), Carpet Right, Maplin, Argos Extra, Toys R Us, Halfords, DW Sports (formerly JJB Sports), Pets at Home, Next Home, Starbucks, McDonalds, Tesco Express and M S Simply Food. In the short period of time that this site has been operational, it has quickly grown to become the second largest retail park in Northern Ireland (second only to Sprucefield in Lisburn). [109] Plans have also been approved for Derry's first Asda store, which will be located at the retail park sharing a unit with Homebase. [110] Sainsbury's also applied for planning permission for a store at Crescent Link, but Environment Minister Alex Attwood turned it down. [111] 

Until March 2016 when it closed, the city was also home to the world's oldest independent department store, Austins . Established in 1830, Austins predates Jenners of Edinburgh by 5 years, Harrods of London by 15 years and Macy's of New York by 25 years. [112] The store's five-story Edwardian building is located within the walled city in the area known as The Diamond. Landmarks St Eugene's Cathedral Bishop Street Courthouse Long Tower Church 

Derry is renowned for its architecture. This can be primarily ascribed to the formal planning of the historic walled city of Derry at the core of the modern city. This is centred on the Diamond with a collection of late Georgian , Victorian and Edwardian buildings maintaining the gridlines of the main thoroughfares (Shipquay Street, Ferryquay Street, Butcher Street and Bishop Street) to the City Gates. St Columb's Cathedral does not follow the grid pattern reinforcing its civic status. This Church of Ireland Cathedral was the first post- Reformation Cathedral built for an Anglican church. The construction of the Roman Catholic St Eugene's Cathedral in the Bogside in the 19th-century was another major architectural addition to the city. The more recent infill buildings within the walls are of varying quality and in many cases these were low quality hurriedly constructed replacements for 1970s bomb damaged buildings. [ citation needed ] The Townscape Heritage Initiative has funded restoration works to key listed buildings and other older structures. 

In the three centuries since their construction, the city walls have been adapted to meet the needs of a changing city. The best example of this adaptation is the insertion of three additional gates – Castle Gate, New Gate and Magazine Gate – into the walls in the course of the 19th century. Today, the fortifications form a continuous promenade around the city centre, complete with cannon, avenues of mature trees and views across Derry. Historic buildings within the city walls include St Augustine's Church, which sits on the city walls close to the site of the original monastic settlement; the copper-domed Austin's department store, which claims to the oldest such store in the world; and the imposing Greek Revival Courthouse on Bishop Street. The red-brick late-Victorian Guildhall , also crowned by a copper dome, stands just beyond Shipquay Gate and close to the river front. 

There are many museums and sites of interest in and around the city, including the Foyle Valley Railway Centre, the Amelia Earhart Centre And Wildlife Sanctuary, the Apprentice Boys Memorial Hall, Ballyoan Cemetery , The Bogside, numerous murals by the Bogside Artists , Derry Craft Village, Free Derry Corner , O'Doherty Tower (now home to part of the Tower Museum), the Guildhall, the Harbour Museum, the Museum of Free Derry, Chapter House Museum, the Workhouse Museum, the Nerve Centre , St. Columb's Park and Leisure Centre, St Eugene's Cathedral , Creggan Country Park , The Millennium Forum and the Foyle and Craigavon bridges. 

The city has seen a large boost to its economy in the form of tourism over the last few years. [ citation needed ] Cheap flights offered by budget airlines have enticed many people to visit the city. Tourism mainly focuses around the pubs, mainly those of Waterloo Street. [ citation needed ] Other attractions include museums, a vibrant shopping centre and trips to the Giant's Causeway , which is approximately 50 miles (80 km) away, though poorly connected by public transport. Lonely Planet called Londonderry the fourth best city in the world to see in 2013. [113] 

Future projects include the Walled City Signature Project, which intends to ensure that the city's walls become a world class tourist experience. [114] The Ilex Urban Regeneration Company is charged with delivering several landmark redevelopments. It has taken control of two former British Army barracks in the centre of the city. The Ebrington site is nearing completion and is linked to the city centre by the new Peace Bridge. Transport The Foyle Bridge showing Derry to Belfast rail link 

The transport network is built out of a complex array of old and modern roads and railways throughout the city and county. The city's road network also makes use of two bridges to cross the River Foyle , the Craigavon Bridge and the Foyle Bridge , the longest bridge in Ireland. Derry also serves as a major transport hub for travel throughout nearby County Donegal . 

In spite of it being the second city of Northern Ireland (and it being the second-largest city in all of Ulster ), road and rail links to other cities are below par for its standing. Many business leaders claim that government investment in the city and infrastructure has been badly lacking. Some have stated that this is due to its outlying border location whilst others have cited a sectarian bias against the region west of the River Bann due to its high proportion of Catholics. [115] [116] There is no direct motorway link with Dublin or Belfast . The rail link to Belfast has been downgraded over the years so that presently it is not a viable alternative to the roads for industry to rely on. There are currently plans for £1 billion worth of transport infrastructure investment in and around the district. [117] Planned upgrades to the A5 Dublin road agreed as part of the Good Friday Agreement and St. Andrews Talks fell through when the government of the Republic of Ireland reneged on its funding citing the recent economic crisis. [118] Buses 

Most public transport in Northern Ireland is operated by the subsidiaries of Translink . Originally the city's internal bus network was run by Ulsterbus , which still provides the city's connections with other towns in Northern Ireland. The city's buses are now run by Ulsterbus Foyle , [119] just as Translink Metro now provides the bus service in Belfast. The Ulsterbus Foyle network offers 13 routes across the city into the suburban areas, excluding an Easibus link which connects to the Waterside and Drumahoe , [120] and a free Rail Link Bus runs from the Waterside Railway Station to the city centre. All buses leave from the Foyle Street Bus Station in the city centre. 

Long distance buses depart from Foyle Street Bus Station to destinations throughout Ireland. Buses are operated by both Ulsterbus and Bus Éireann on cross-border routes. Lough Swilly formerly operated buses to Co. Donegal , but the company entered liquidation and is no longer in operation. There is a half-hourly service to Belfast every day, called the Maiden City Flyer, which is the Goldline Express flagship route. There are hourly services to Strabane , Omagh , Coleraine , Letterkenny and Buncrana , and up to twelve services a day to bring people to Dublin . There is a daily service to Sligo , Galway , Shannon Airport and Limerick . Air Main article: City of Derry Airport 

City of Derry Airport , the council-owned airport near Eglinton , has been growing in recent years with new investment in extending the runway and plans to redevelop the terminal. [121] It is hoped that the new investment will add to the airport's currently limited array of domestic and international flights and reduce the annual subsidy of £3.5 million from the local council. 

The A2 from Maydown to Eglinton , serving airport , has recently been turned into a dual carriageway . [122] City of Derry airport is the main regional airport for County Donegal , County Londonderry and west County Tyrone as well as Derry City itself. 

The airport is served by Ryanair with scheduled flights to Birmingham International Airport , Glasgow Airport , Liverpool , [123] and London Stansted all year round with a summer schedule to Alicante and Faro . Railways 

Northern Ireland Railways (N.I.R.) has a single route from Londonderry railway station (also known as Waterside Station) on the Waterside to Belfast Great Victoria Street via Coleraine , Ballymoney , Ballymena , Antrim , Mossley West and Belfast Central . The service, which had been allowed to deteriorate in the 1990s, has since been improved by increased investment. 

In 2008 the Department for Regional Development announced plans to have the track re-laid between Derry and Coleraine by 2013, add a passing loop to increase traffic capacity and increase the number of trains by introducing two additional diesel multiple units . [124] The £86 million plan will reduce the journey time to Belfast by 30 minutes and allow commuter trains to arrive before 9 a.m. for the first time. [124] Many still do not use the train, because, at over two hours, it is slower centre-to-centre than the 100-minute Ulsterbus Goldline Express service. [125] Railway history Ireland's railway network in 1906 

Throughout the first half of the 20th century the city was served by four different railways that between them linked the city with much of the province of Ulster, plus a harbour railway network that linked the other four lines. There was also a tramway on the City side of the Foyle. 19th and 20th century growth 

Derry's first railway was the Irish gauge ( 5 ft 3 in ( 1,600 mm )) Londonderry and Enniskillen Railway (L ER). Construction began in 1845 from a temporary station at Cow Market on the City side of the Foyle, reached Strabane in 1847 [126] and was extended from Cow Market to its permanent terminus at Foyle Road in 1850. [127] The L ER reached Omagh in 1852 and Enniskillen in 1854, [127] and was absorbed into the Great Northern Railway (Ireland) in 1883. [128] 

The Londonderry and Coleraine Railway (L CR), also Irish gauge, reached the city in 1852 and opened its terminus at Waterside. [127] The Belfast and Northern Counties Railway leased the line from 1861 and took it over in 1871. 

The Londonderry and Lough Swilly Railway opened between Farland Point on Lough Swilly and a temporary terminus at Pennyburn in 1863. [127] In 1866 it extended from Pennyburn to its permanent terminus at Graving Dock. [127] The L LSR was Irish gauge until 1885, when it was converted to 3 ft ( 914 mm ) narrow gauge for through running with the Letterkenny Railway. 

The Londonderry Port and Harbour Commissioners (LPHC) linked Graving Dock and Foyle Road stations with a railway through Middle Quay in 1867, and linked this line with Waterside station by a railway over the new Carlisle Bridge in 1868. [127] The bridge was replaced in 1933 with the double-deck Craigavon Bridge , with the LPHC railway on its lower deck. 

In 1900 the 3 ft ( 914 mm ) gauge Donegal Railway extended from Strabane to Derry, establishing a terminus at Victoria Road . This was next to Carlisle Bridge and had a junction with the LPHC railway. [127] The LPHC line was altered to dual gauge which allowed 3 ft ( 914 mm ) gauge traffic between the Donegal Railway and L LSR as well as Irish gauge traffic between the GNR and B NCR. In 1906 the Northern Counties Committee (NCC, successor to the B NCR) and the GNR jointly took over the Donegal Railway, making it the County Donegal Railways Joint Committee (CDRJC). 

The United Kingdom Government subsidised both the L LSR and the Donegal Railway to build long extensions into remote parts of County Donegal . By 1905 these served much of the county, [129] making Derry (and also Strabane) a key rail hub for the county. 

The City of Derry Tramways was opened in 1897. [130] This was a standard gauge ( 1,435 mm ( 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in )) line served by horse trams and was never electrified. [130] The tramway had only one line, was 1.5 miles (2.4 km) long, and ran along the City side of the Foyle parallel to the LPHC's line on that side of the river. [131] It was closed in 1919. [130] 20th century decline 

The partition of Ireland in 1922 turned the boundary with County Donegal into an international frontier. This changed trade patterns to the railways' detriment and placed border posts on every line to and from Derry except the NCC route to Coleraine . [126] The L LSR crossed the border between Pennyburn and Bridge End, the CDRJC crossed just beyond Strabane, and the GNR line crossed twice between Derry and Strabane. [126] Stops for customs inspections greatly delayed trains and disrupted timekeeping. 

Over the next few years customs agreements between the two states enabled GNR trains to and from Derry to pass through the Free State without inspection unless they were scheduled to serve local stations on the west bank of the Foyle, and for goods on all railways to be carried between different parts of the Free State to pass through Northern Ireland under customs bond . However, local passenger and goods traffic continued to be delayed by customs examinations. 

In the 1920s and 30s and again after the Second World War the railways also faced increasing road competition. The L LSR closed its line in 1953, followed by the CDRJC in 1954. [132] The Ulster Transport Authority took over the NCC in 1949 and the GNR's lines in Northern Ireland in 1958. The UTA also took over the LPHC railway, which it closed in 1962. [133] In accordance with The Benson Report submitted to the Northern Ireland Government in 1963, the UTA closed the former GNR line to Derry in 1965. [132] [133] [134] 

Since 1965 the former L CR line has been Derry's sole railway link. As such it has carried not only passenger services between Derry and Belfast but also CIÉ freight services using Derry as a railhead for Donegal. Road network 

The road network has historically seen under-investment and has lacked good road connections to both Belfast and Dublin for many years. [ citation needed ] Long overdue, the largest road investment in the north west's history is now (2010) taking place with building of the 'A2 Broadbridge Maydown to City of Derry Airport dualling' project [135] and announcement of the 'A6 Londonderry to Dungiven Dualling Scheme' [136] which will help to reduce the travel time to Belfast. [137] The latter project brings a dual-carriageway link between Northern Ireland's two largest cities one step closer. The project is costing £320 million and is expected to be completed in 2016. 

In October 2006 the Government of Ireland announced that it was to invest €1 billion in Northern Ireland; [138] and one of the planned projects will be 'The A5 Western Transport Corridor', [139] the complete upgrade of the A5 Derry – Omagh – Aughnacloy (– Dublin) road, around 90 kilometres (56 miles) long, to dual carriageway standard. [140] 

It is not yet known if these two separate projects will connect at any point, although there have been calls for some form of connection between the two routes. In June 2008 Conor Murphy , Minister for Regional Development, announced that there will be a study into the feasibility of connecting the A5 and A6. [117] Should it proceed, the scheme would most likely run from Drumahoe to south of Prehen along the south east of the City. [124] Sea A mass of surrendered German U-boats at their mooring at Lisahally 

Londonderry Port at Lisahally is the United Kingdom's most westerly port and has capacity for 30,000-ton vessels. The Londonderry Port and Harbour Commissioners (LPHC) announced record turnover, record profits and record tonnage figures for the year ended March 2008. The figures are the result of a significant capital expenditure programme for the period 2000 to 2007 of about £22 million. Tonnage handled by LPHC increased almost 65% between 2000 and 2007, according to the latest [ when? ] annual results. 

The port gave vital Allied service in the longest running campaign of the Second World War, the Battle of the Atlantic, and saw the surrender of the German U-Boat fleet at Lisahally on 8 May 1945. [141] Inland waterways 

The tidal River Foyle is navigable from the coast at Derry to approximately 10 miles (16 km) inland. In 1796, the Strabane Canal was opened, continuing the navigation a further 4 miles (6 km) southwards to Strabane . The canal was closed in 1962. Education Magee College became a campus of Ulster University in 1969 

Derry is home to the Magee Campus of Ulster University , formerly Magee College. However, Lockwood's [142] 1960s decision to locate Northern Ireland's second university in Coleraine rather than Derry helped contribute to the formation of the civil rights movement that ultimately led to The Troubles . Derry was the town more closely associated with higher learning, with Magee College already more than a century old by that time. [143] [144] In the mid-1980s a half-hearted attempt was made at rectifying this mistake by forming Magee College as a campus of the Ulster University but this has failed to stifle calls for the establishment of an independent University in Derry that can grow to it full potential. [145] The campus has never thrived and currently only has 3,500 students out of a total Ulster University student population of 27,000. Ironically, although Coleraine is blamed by many in the city for 'stealing the University', it has only 5,000 students, the remaining 19,000 being based in Belfast. [146] 

The North West Regional College is also based in the city. In recent years it has grown to almost 30,000 students. [147] 

One of the two oldest secondary schools in Northern Ireland is located in Derry, Foyle and Londonderry College . It was founded in 1616 by the merchant taylors and remains a popular choice. Other secondary schools include St. Columb's College , Oakgrove Integrated College , St Cecilia's College , St Mary's College , St. Joseph's Boys' School , Lisneal College , Thornhill College , Lumen Christi College and St. Brigid's College. There are also numerous primary schools. Sports The Derry GAA team ahead of the 2009 National League final. 

The city is home to sports clubs and teams. Both association football and Gaelic football are popular in the area. Association football 

In association football, the city's most prominent clubs include Derry City who play in the national league of the Republic of Ireland ; Institute of the NIFL Championship and Oxford United Stars and Trojans , both of the Northern Ireland Intermediate League . In addition to these clubs, who all play in national leagues, other clubs are based in the city. The local football league governed by the IFA is the North-West Junior League , which contains many clubs from the city, such as BBOB (Boys Brigade Old Boys) and Lincoln Courts. The city's other junior league is the Derry and District League and teams from the city and surrounding areas participate, including Don Boscos and Creggan Swifts. The Foyle Cup youth soccer tournament is held annually in the city. It has attracted many notable teams in the past, including Werder Bremen , IFK Göteborg and Ferencváros . Derry City taking on Paris Saint-Germain at the Brandywell Stadium during the 2006 UEFA Cup Gaelic football 

In Gaelic football Derry GAA are the county team and play in the Gaelic Athletic Association 's National Football League , Ulster Senior Football Championship and All-Ireland Senior Football Championship . They also field hurling teams in the equivalent tournaments. There are many Gaelic games clubs in and around the city, for example Na Magha CLG , Steelstown GAC , Doire Colmcille CLG , Seán Dolans GAC , Na Piarsaigh CLG Doire Trasna and Slaughtmanus GAC . Boxing 

There are many boxing clubs, the most well-known being The Ring Boxing Club , which is associated with Charlie Nash [148] and John Duddy , [149] amongst others. Rugby Union 

Rugby Union is also quite popular in the city, with the City of Derry Rugby Club situated not far from the city centre. [150] City of Derry won both the Ulster Towns Cup and the Ulster Junior Cup in 2009. Londonderry YMCA RFC is another rugby club and is based in Drumahoe which is just outside the city. Basketball 

The city's only basketball club is North Star Basketball Club which has teams in the Basketball Northern Ireland senior and junior Leagues. [151] Cricket 

Cricket is also a popular sport in the city, particularly in the Waterside. The city is home to two cricket clubs, Brigade Cricket Club and Glendermott Cricket Club , both of whom play in the North West Senior League . Golf 

Golf is also a sport which is popular with many in the City. There are two golf clubs situated in the city, City of Derry Golf Club and Foyle International Golf Centre . Culture Hands Across the Divide sculpture, by Maurice Harron . 

In recent years the city and surrounding countryside have become well known for their artistic legacy, producing Nobel Prize-winning poet Seamus Heaney , [152] poet Seamus Deane , playwright Brian Friel , [153] writer and music critic Nik Cohn , artist Willie Doherty , socio-political commentator and activist Eamonn McCann [154] and bands such as The Undertones . The large political gable-wall murals of Bogside Artists, Free Derry Corner, the Foyle Film Festival, the Derry Walls, St Eugene's and St Columb's Cathedrals and the annual Halloween street carnival [155] are popular tourist attractions. In 2010, Derry was named the UK's tenth 'most musical' city by PRS for Music . [156] [156] Peace Flame Monument, unveiled in May 2013. 

In May 2013 a perpetual Peace Flame Monument was unveiled by Martin Luther King III and Presbyterian minister Rev. David Latimer. The flame was lit by children from both traditions in the city and is one of only 15 such flames across the world. [157] [158] Media 

The local papers the Derry Journal (known as the Londonderry Journal until 1880) and the Londonderry Sentinel reflect the divided history of the city: the Journal was founded in 1772 and is Ireland's second oldest newspaper; [43] the Sentinel newspaper was formed in 1829 when new owners of the Journal embraced Catholic Emancipation , and the editor left the paper to set up the Sentinel . There are numerous radio stations receivable: the largest stations based in the city are BBC Radio Foyle [159] and the commercial station Q102.9 . [160] There was a locally based television station, C9TV , one of only two local or 'restricted' television services in Northern Ireland, which ceased broadcasts in 2007. Night-life 

The city's night-life is mainly focused on the weekends, with several bars and clubs providing "student nights" during the weekdays. Waterloo Street and Strand Road provide the main venues. Waterloo Street, a steep street lined with both Irish traditional and modern pubs, frequently has live rock and traditional music at night. The city is renowned for producing talented musicians and many bands perform in venues around the city, for example the Smalltown America duo, Fighting with Wire and Jetplane Landing . Numerous other young local and indeed international bands perform at the Nerve Centre . Events In 2013, Derry became the first city to be designated UK City of Culture , having been awarded the title in July 2010. [12] [13] Also in 2013 the city hosted Radio 1's Big Weekend [161] and the Lumiere festival . [162] The "Banks of the Foyle Hallowe'en Carnival" (known in Irish as Féile na Samhna) in Derry are a huge tourism boost for the city. The carnival is promoted as being the first and longest running Halloween carnival in the whole of Ireland, [163] [164] It is called the largest street party in Ireland by the Derry Visitor and Convention Bureau with more than 30,000 ghoulish revellers taking to the streets annually. [165] In March, the city hosts the Big Tickle Comedy Festival, which in 2006 featured Dara Ó Briain and Colin Murphy . In April the city plays host to the City of Derry Jazz and Big Band Festival and in November the Foyle Film Festival, the biggest film festival in Northern Ireland. Every summer the city hosts Tomo-Dachi , Ireland's largest Anime convention , which in July 2006 was held at Magee College , Ulster University . [166] The Siege of Derry is commemorated annually by the fraternal organisation the Apprentice Boys of Derry in the week-long Maiden City Festival . The Instinct Festival is an annual youth festival celebrating the Arts. It is held around Easter and has proven a success in recent years. Celtronic is a major annual electronic dance festival held at venues all around the city. The 2007 Festival featured the DJ, Erol Alkan . The Millennium Forum is the main theatre in the city, it holds numerous shows weekly. On 9 December 2007 Derry entered the Guinness Book of Records when 13,000 Santas gathered to break the world record beating previous records held by Liverpool and Las Vegas. [167] Winner of the 2005 Britain in Bloom competition (City category). Runner-up 2009. References in popular music 

I was born in Londonderry 

I was born in Derry City too 

Oh what a special child 

To see such things and still to smile 

I know that there was something wrong 

But I kept my head down and carried on. —  The Divine Comedy , "Sunrise" 

In 1803 we sailed out to sea, 

Out from the sweet town of Derry, 

For Australia bound if we did not all drown, 

And the marks of our fetters we carried... —  Bobby Sands , "Back Home in Derry" [168] 

It is old but it is beautiful, and its colours they are fine. 

It was worn at Derry , Aughrim , Enniskillen and the Boyne . 

My father wore it as a youth in bygone days of yore. 

And on the Twelfth I love to wear the sash my father wore — Anon., " The Sash " 

...In the early morning the shirt factory horn called women from Creggan, 

the Moor and the Bog. 

While the men on the dole played a mother's role, 

fed the children and then walked the dog. 

And when times got tough there was just about enough. 

But they saw it through without complaining. 

For deep inside was a burning pride in the town I loved so well. 

There was music there in the Derry air, like a language that we all could understand... —  Phil Coulter , " The Town I Loved So Well " [169] Notable people Main article: List of notable people from Derry Millennium Forum, Newmarket Street 

Notable people who were born or have lived in Derry include: Frederick Hervey , Bishop of Derry and 4th Earl of Bristol William Thomas Gaul , became Bishop of Mashonaland Edward Leach , recipient of the Victoria Cross The Restoration dramatist George Farquhar Authors Joyce Cary , Seamus Deane , Jennifer Johnston and Nell McCafferty Poet and Nobel laureate Seamus Heaney Social Democratic and Labour Party founder and Nobel Peace Prize winner John Hume Scientist and Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine winner William C. Campbell [170] [171] Deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland Martin McGuinness Republic of Ireland national football team head coach Martin O'Neill Everton player Darron Gibson Actresses Amanda Burton and Roma Downey Girls Aloud member Nadine Coyle Neil Hannon lead singer of The Divine Comedy Eurovision Song Contest winner and former politician Dana The band The Undertones and their one-time lead singer Feargal Sharkey Jimmy McShane of Baltimora Triathlete Aileen Morrison Tom McGuinness , Gaelic footballer [172] Damian McGinty and Keith Harkin, vocalists with the group Celtic Thunder John Park , recipient of the Victoria Cross Daniel Quigley (World ISKA Professional Super Heaveyweight Kickboxing Champion) [173] Miles Ryan , recipient of the Victoria Cross See also Ballynagalliagh Institute F.C. List of abbeys and priories in County Londonderry List of towns and villages in Northern Ireland Scouting in Northern Ireland References ^ "PostTowns by UK Postcode Area: 2007 information" . Evox Facilities. 2007. Archived from the original on 23 July 2008 . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . ^ a b "Derry" . Collins Dictionary. n.d . Retrieved 24 September 2014 . ^ "Derry/Londonderry" . BBC . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . [ dead link ] ^ "The Communications Market 2007" (PDF) . Ofcom. p. 14. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 June 2008 . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . ^ DERRY REGIONAL CITY – Business Investment . Retrieved 1 November 2008. Archived March 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine . ^ Library Ireland – Sketches of Olden Days in Northern Ireland ^ Anthony David Mills (6 November 2003). A Dictionary of British Place-Names . Oxford University Press. pp. 430–. ISBN 978-0-19-852758-9 . Retrieved 27 June 2012 . ^ a b Ryan Ver Berkmoes; Oliver Berry; Geert Cole; David Else (1 September 2009). Western Europe . Lonely Planet. p. 704. ISBN 978-1-74104-917-6 . Retrieved 30 May 2011 . ^ a b "What's in a name?" . Derry Journal . 2 October 2009 . Retrieved 1 December 2009 . ^ [1] [ dead link ] ^ Brian Lacy (Editor), Archaeological Survey of County Donegal , p. 1. Donegal County Council , Lifford , 1983. ^ a b BBC News (15 July 2010). "Londonderry named the UK City of Culture" . BBC News . Retrieved 15 July 2010 . ^ a b Palmer, Robert. "The race is on to find UK's first 'City of Culture' for 2013" . The National Archives . Retrieved 15 July 2010 . [ permanent dead link ] ^ "Derry City Council, Re Application for Judicial Review [2007] NIQB 5" . Derry City Council. 25 January 2007 . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . ^ "Stroke City to remain Londonderry" . BBC. 25 January 2007 . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . ^ "City name row lands in High Court" . BBC News . 6 December 2006 . Retrieved 1 May 2010 . ^ "Derry City Council – High Court Provides Clarification on City's Name" . Derrycity.gov.uk. 25 January 2007. Archived from the original on 2 June 2008 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ Equality Impact Assessments Derry City Council website Archived December 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine . ^ Draft EQIA, Appendix pp.91–2 ^ a b McMahon, Damien (26 February 2010). "Report of Town Clerk and Chief Executive to Special Council Meeting" . Archived from the original on 10 July 2007 . Retrieved 1 May 2010 . ^ McDaid, Brendan (24 July 2015). "New 'Derry' name bid 'disgusting', claim DUP" . Derry Journal . Retrieved 24 July 2014 . ^ "Education/Oideachas" . BBC . Retrieved 14 July 2007 . ^ Hudson, John. "Londonderry" . The British Library. Archived from the original on 16 October 2007 . Retrieved 29 September 2007 . ^ a b Curl, James Stevens (2001). "The City of London and the Plantation of Ulster" . BBCi History Online . Retrieved 10 August 2008 . ^ a b c "Aspects of Sectarian Division in Derry Londonderry – First public discussion: The Name Of this City?" . Retrieved 15 June 2008 . ^ Kuusisto-Arponen, Anna-Kaisa (2001). "The end of violence and introduction of 'real' politics: Tensions in peaceful Northern Ireland". Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography . Blackwell Publishing. 83 (3): 121–130. doi : 10.1111/j.0435-3684.2001.00100.x . JSTOR 491073 . ^ War zone language: linguistic aspects of the conflict in Northern Ireland by Cordula Hawes-Bilger ( ISBN 978-3-7720-8200-9 ), page 100 ^ a b McCafferty, Kevin (2001). Ethnicity and Language Change: English in (London)Derry, Northern Ireland . Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing. p. 6. ISBN 978-1588110022 . ^ "Irish Rail network showing 'Derry ' " . Iarnród Éireann . Archived from the original on 18 November 2008 . Retrieved 29 July 2009 . ^ Carroll, Stephen (9 April 2009). "Derry-born can choose city's name on passport" . Irish Times . Retrieved 23 July 2015 . ^ Davenport, Fionn; Beech, Charlotte; Downs, Tom; Hannigan, Des; Parnell, Fran; Wilson, Neil (2006). Ireland (7th ed.). London: Lonely Planet. p. 625. ISBN 978-1-74059-968-9 . ^ "Londonderry Chamber of Commerce" . Londonderrychamber.co.uk . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ Change of District Name (Derry) Order 1984 ^ Sections 7, 8 and 132 of the Local Government Act (Northern Ireland) 1972 (Eliz II 20 21 c.9) ^ "The Walled City Experience" . Northern Ireland Tourist Board . Retrieved 4 September 2008 . ^ The One Show , BBC1, 15 July 2010 ^ "Stephen King's Map of Maine" . Retrieved 13 May 2012 . ^ "Web Development Belfast | Web solutions Ireland | Biznet IIS Northern Ireland" . Brilliantireland.com. Archived from the original on 21 August 2008 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Antrim and Derry" . Roughguides.com. Archived from the original on 22 July 2010 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "County Derry, Northern Ireland – Londonderry" . Irelandwide.com . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Derry City Walls Conservation Plan. pdf doc. p19" (PDF) . ^ Historic Walls of Derry Discover Northern Ireland website ^ a b c d e f g h i j Lacey, Brian (1999). Discover Derry . City Guides. Dublin: The O'Brien Press Ltd. ISBN 0-86278-596-0 . ^ "History of Derry" . www.geographia.com . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ "King ponders plantation" . www.irishtimes.com/. Archived from the original on 26 October 2010 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ a b Brian Lacy, Archaeological Survey of County Donegal , p. 1. Donegal County Council , Lifford , 1983. ^ "Walls Constructed" . Derry's Walls . Guildhall Press. 2005–2008 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "World Facts Index United Kingdom Londonderry" . worldfacts.us. 2005 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "BRIEF HISTORY OF ST COLUMB'S CATHEDRAL LONDONDERRY" . www.stcolumbscathedral.org. Archived from the original on 4 January 2009 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ a b Johnson, James H. (1957). "The population of Londonderry during the Great Irish Famine". The Economic History Review . Blackwell Publishing. 10 (2): 273–285. doi : 10.2307/2590863 . JSTOR 2590863 . ^ Page 67 "Derry beyond the walls" by SDLP politician John Hume ^ a b http://www.mccorkellline.com/ McCorkell Line ^ Lambert, Tim. "A Brief History of Derry" . Local Histories.org . Retrieved 28 March 2008 . ^ JOYCE, JOE (24 June 2009). "June 24th, 1920: Pitched battles on the streets of Derry" . www.irishtimes.com . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ "This is a chronology of Irish War of Independence" . saoirse.21.forumer.com . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ Cullen, Ian (13 October 2008). "Derry was 'best kept secret' in Battle of the Atlantic" . Derry Journal . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ "BBC Online – Northern Ireland – Radio Foyle" . Bbc.co.uk . Retrieved 13 May 2012 . ^ a b "World War Two in Derry" . Culturenorthernireland.org . Retrieved 13 May 2012 . ^ http://archives.chicagotribune.com/1942/07/02/page/2/article/giant-u-s-naval-base-completed-at-londonderry ^ "The U-boat surrender" . www.secondworldwarni.org . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ Explaining Northern Ireland: broken images by John McGarry, Brendan O'Leary ( ISBN 978-0631183495 ), pages 205–206 ^ Race and inequality: world perspectives on affirmative action by Elaine Kennedy-Dubourdieu ( ISBN 978-0754648390 ), page 108 ^ The Irish Catholic diaspora in America by Lawrence John McCaffrey ( ISBN 978-0813208961 ), page 168 ^ a b "Discrimination – Chronology of Important Events" . cain.ulst.ac.uk. 6 January 2009 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ Whyte, John (1983). "How much discrimination was there under the unionist regime, 1921–68?". In Gallagher, Tom; O'Connell, James. Contemporary Irish Studies . Manchester: Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-0919-7 . ^ "A whale of a time" . BBC Radio Foyle . Retrieved 12 October 2008 . ^ a b Letters Patent certifying the arms of the City of Londonderry issued to Derry City Council, sealed by Garter and Norroy and Ulster Kings of Arms dated 30 April 2003 ^ Genealogical Office, Dublin: GO Ms 60, Sketches of arms by Richard Carney , fol. 47 ^ College of Arms, London: The Arms of Peers of Ireland and some Commoners , fol. 133d (c.1652) ^ L E Rothwell, An inquiry initiated by Derry City Council into the ensigns armourial and related matters of the City of Londonderry ^ Letters Patent ratifying and confirming the arms of the City of Londonderry sealed by Garter and Norroy Ulster Kings of Arms dated 28 April 1952 ^ "Derry Slopes Landscape" . DOENI . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ "History–The Bogside" . Museum of Free Derry . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ Wilson, David (12 February 2010). "Concerns over Lough Foyle bird numbers" . Derry Journal . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ "Ness Country Park" . DOENI. Archived from the original on 29 January 2010 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ "Prehen Wood" . Northern Ireland Tourist Board. Archived from the original on 28 February 2010 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ "Airport guides climate page" . Derry-ldy.airports-guides.com. 5 January 2012 . Retrieved 13 May 2012 . ^ "Station Locations" . MetOffice . ^ "Station Locations" . MetOffice . ^ "1995 minimum" . tutiempo . ^ "Ballykelly SAMOS 1981–2010" . Met Office . Retrieved 30 June 2013 . ^ "Census 2011 – Population and Household Estimates for Northern Ireland" . Northern Ireland Statistics Research Agency . Retrieved 24 September 2012 . ^ a b "Statistics press notice: Mid-year population estimates Northern Ireland (2006)" (PDF) . Northern Ireland Statistics Research Agency. 31 July 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 June 2008 . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . ^ "Londonderry population movement from West bank to East bank" (PDF) . 11 January 1979. ^ "Note of a meeting between Secretary of State and William Ross Unionist MP" (PDF) . Public Records Office of Northern Ireland. 6 November 1978. ^ Mullenaccessdate=18 May 2013, Kevin (31 January 2013). "Catholics outnumber Protestants on both banks of the Foyle" . Londonderry Sentinel. ^ "Catholics urged to support neighbours" . BBC News. 18 October 2006 . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . ^ Peter Shirlow; Brian Graham; Amanda McMullan; Brendan Murtagh; Gillian Robinson; Neil Southern (2005). "Population Change and Social Inclusion Study: Derry/Londonderry" (PDF) . Office of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister . Retrieved 27 March 2008 . ^ a b "Catholics urged to support neighbours" . BBC News. 18 October 2006 . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . ^ "Taking a Stand Derry Journal Editorial" . Derry Journal. 11 July 2006 . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . [ dead link ] ^ "Women, art and architecture appear to have achieved a rare symbiosis in a new project in Derry" . Declan Sheehan CIRCA 95. 2001. Archived from the original on 28 May 2006 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "History of the Bogside" . Bloody Sunday Trust. Archived from the original on 23 August 2006 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "Derrys association with shirt making" . GeoCities.com. Archived from the original on 25 December 2007 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ Karl Marx; Charles H. Kerr (1867). "Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Vol. I. The Process of Capitalist Production. Part IV, Chapter XV" . Co. Chicago. Archived from the original on 21 August 2006 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter ( link ) ^ "Thriving industry is no more: Glory days of shirt factories recalled" . Derry Journal Online. 13 June 2008 . Retrieved 15 June 2008 . ^ "First European Plant –1958" . heritage.dupont.com. Archived from the original on 17 March 2006 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "Du Pont (UK) Ltd" . Northern Ireland Executive . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ N. Haass, Richard (6 September 2002). "U.S.-Irish Business Summit" . Richard N. Haass, director, Policy Planning Staff, Remarks to the US – Irish Business Summit, Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on 1 September 2006 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "UK: Northern Ireland Software centre plans under fire" . BBC. 25 June 1999 . Retrieved 15 December 2009 . ^ "Protest over NI missile firm" . BBC. 25 March 2003 . Retrieved 27 August 2006 . ^ "Derry City Now A 'No – Go' Area for the Arms Trade" . www.indymedia.ie. 8 January 2004 . Retrieved 19 July 2006 . ^ "Defence firm protesters arrested" . BBC News . 9 August 2006 . Retrieved 20 September 2015 . ^ "Raytheon looks for new home" . Londonderry Sentinel . 19 June 2009 . Retrieved 15 December 2009 . ^ "Derry – Regional City" (PDF) . Derry City Council. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2007 . Retrieved 8 April 2008 . ^ Hadden, Peter (1994). "Beyond the Troubles? – Chapter 8, Will there be peace?" . Marxist . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "House of Commons – Column 372 373" . House of Commons. 1 March 1990 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "Pound's record low to bring a swarm of euro shoppers" . Belfast Telegraph . 12 December 2008 . Retrieved 9 November 2009 . ^ "Northern Ireland's border retailers gear up for a euro boost this Christmas" . Belfast Telegraph . 2 November 2009 . Retrieved 9 November 2009 . ^ "Crescent Link Retail Park bought for £92 m" . Derry Journal Online. 9 November 2007 . Retrieved 15 June 2008 . ^ "Derry's first Asda store to create 350 jobs" . Belfast Telegraph . 22 December 2012 . Retrieved 31 December 2013 . ^ "Attwood gives ASDA green light for new Londonderry store" . BBC News . 21 December 2012 . Retrieved 31 December 2013 . ^ "Austins in Brief" . Austinsstore.com. Archived from the original on 17 August 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Londonderry 'world's fourth best city to visit' in 2013" . BBC News. 23 October 2012 . Retrieved 28 October 2012 . ^ "Walled City of Derry – Signature Project" . Archived from the original on 2 February 2008. The Industry Website of the Northern Ireland Tourist Board. Retrieved 10 September 2006. ^ "The Derry March – Background Information" . CAIN Web Service. 23 March 2003 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "NORTHERN IRELAND DURING THE 1960s" . Irelandseye.com, 1999–2006 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ a b "Over £1billion transport investment planned for North West in Northern Ireland" . eGov Monitor. 13 June 2008. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009 . Retrieved 18 June 2008 . ^ "Irish government pulls £400m A5 upgrade funding" . BBC. 9 November 2011 . Retrieved 22 October 2012 . ^ "The launch of Ulsterbus Foyle" . Translink. Archived from the original on 11 March 2007 . Retrieved 22 September 2006 . ^ "Foyle Area Ulsterbus routes" . Archived from the original on 27 May 2008 . Retrieved 15 June 2008 . ^ "Story of investment – £10 million investment in City of Derry Airport." . 4ni.co.uk . Retrieved 22 September 2006 . ^ "A2 dualling Maydown to City of Derry airport – Northern Ireland Roads Site" . Wesleyjohnston.com . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ Liverpool - Derry ^ a b c McKinney, Seamus (12 June 2008). "£86 m upgrade to rail link will 'take half an hour off journey ' " . The Irish News . Retrieved 14 June 2008 . ^ "Doing business in County Londonderry" . Retrieved 15 June 2008 . ^ a b c Hajducki, S. Maxwell (1974). A Railway Atlas of Ireland . Newton Abbott: David Charles . map 3. ISBN 0-7153-5167-2 . ^ a b c d e f g Hajducki, op. cit. , inset to map 2 ^ Patterson, Edward M (1962). The County Donegal Railways . Dawlish: David Charles . pp. 10–11. ^ Hajducki, op. cit. , maps 2, 3 6 ^ a b c Hajducki, op. cit. , page xvii ^ Hajducki, op. cit. , map 3 ^ a b Hajducki, op. cit. , map 39 ^ a b Baker, Michael H.C. (1972). Irish Railways since 1916 . London: Ian Allan . p. 209. ISBN 0711002827 . ^ Baker, op. cit. , page 155 ^ "A2 BroadBridge Maydown to City of Derry Airport Dualling Exhibition Panels | Road Improvements | Road Service Northern Ireland" . Roadimprovements.roadsni.gov.uk. 26 November 2009. Archived from the original on 7 September 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "A6 Londonderry to Dungiven Dualling Scheme | Road Improvements | Road Service Northern Ireland" . Roadimprovements.roadsni.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 3 May 2010 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "75% of the journey upon completion will be on either High Quality Dual Carriageway or Motorway Standard Roads." . www.wesleyjohnston.com/roads . Retrieved 22 September 2006 . ^ Dempster, Stephen (24 October 2006). "It's trick-or-treat time with Brown" . www.belfasttoday.net . Johnston Press Digital Publishing . Retrieved 31 October 2006 . ^ "Contract Details | Roads Service Northern Ireland" . Roadsni.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Package would fund biggest-ever cross-border project" . www.breakingnews.ie. 22 March 2007 . Retrieved 9 June 2007 . ^ Bowcott, Owen (20 August 2007). "Raise the U-boat: council plans to put Nazi sub in maritime museum" . London: Guardian Unlimited . Retrieved 19 June 2008 . ^ A History of Magee College Ulster University website ^ A history of Irish Theatre Google books ^ Northern Ireland during the 1960s www.irelandseye.com ^ Derry needs big idea to get over depression Irish News website 1 February 2009 Archived September 3, 2015, at the Wayback Machine . ^ Ulster University Ulster University website ^ The North West Region Profile – Derry and Donegal Ireland Northwest website ^ "Ring ABC" . Ring ABC . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "The Ring abc Videos" . Ringabc.net . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "City of Derry Rugby Club Official Website" . Cityofderryrfc.com. 5 June 2010 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "North Star Basketball Club Official Website" . Northstarbasketball.com . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Seamus Heaney – Biography" . Nobelprize.org . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Milestone birthday for playwright Brian Friel – Derry Today" . Derryjournal.com . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Meet the Candidates – Eamonn McCann People Before Profit Alliance – Derry Today" . Derryjournal.com . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . [ dead link ] ^ "Halloween 2009" . Derrycity.gov.uk. 2 November 2009. Archived from the original on 23 May 2010 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ a b Richard Smith. "Bristol named Britain's most musical city" . mirror.co.uk . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ " ' Pathway to Peace' cycle event on Sunday" . Derry Journal. 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 15 August 2014 . ^ Deeney, Donna (16 May 2013). "Derry's children united to light flame of peace" . BelfastTelegraph.co.uk . Retrieved 15 August 2014 . ^ "Northern Ireland – Radio Foyle" . BBC . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Q102.9 FM" . Q102.fm. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Radio 1's Big Weekend Line-Up Announced" . Culture Northern Ireland. ^ "Londonderry Lumiere light show 'attracts 180,000 ' " . BBC News. 2 December 2013. ^ "Banks of the Foyle Hallowe'en Carnival" . Derry City Council. Archived from the original on 21 July 2006 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ Pelan, Rebecca. "Masquerading as Subversion?" . Politics and Culture. Archived from the original on 9 March 2006 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ Rogers, Malcolm. "Ireland, home of Halloween" . The Irish Post . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "Magee To Host Japanese Animation Convention" . news.ulster.ac.uk. 7 December 2005 . Retrieved 5 September 2006 . ^ "Santa record bid attracts 13,000" . BBC. 9 December 2007 . Retrieved 28 August 2008 . ^ "Back Home in Derry, full lyrics" . Celtic-lyrics.com . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "The Town I Loved So Well, full lyrics" . Celtic-lyrics.com . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "Londonderry scientist receives Nobel Prize for Medicine" . BBC News. 11 December 2015 . Retrieved 13 December 2015 . ^ "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2015" . Nobel Foundation . Retrieved 13 December 2015 . ^ "Ulster's 125 – Derry shortlist" . The Irish News . 10 February 2009 . Retrieved 7 April 2009 . ^ World Championship Kickboxing coming to ‘The Venue’ – Derry Journal External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Derry . Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Derry . Derry, City of at DMOZ Derry City Strabane District Council Derry visitor information Londonderry Chamber of Commerce MSN Map Google Map v t e Places in County Londonderry List of places in County Londonderry Cities Derry Towns Coleraine Limavady Magherafelt Portstewart Villages 

and townlands Aghadowey Altnagelvin Ardgarvan Ardmore Articlave Artikelly Ballerin Ballyhanedin Ballykelly Ballylifford Ballymaguigan Ballynagalliagh Ballyrashane Ballyronan Ballyrory Ballysally Ballyscullion Banagher Bellaghy Bellarena Benone Bogside Burnfoot Campsey Carrowclare Castledawson Castlerock Clady Claudy Coagh Creagh Culmore Culnady Curran Derrynaflaw Desertmartin Downhill Draperstown Drumahoe Drummullan Drumraighland Drumsurn Dungiven Eglinton Elagh More Feeny Foreglen Garvagh Glack Glenone Gortnahey Goshedan Greysteel Gulladuff Inishrush Kilcronaghan Killaloo Killywool Kilrea Knockloughrim Largy Lavey Lenamore Lettershandoney Lisbunny Lissan Macosquin Maghera Magilligan Maydown Moneymore Moneyneany Newbuildings Nixon's Corner Park Prehen Ringsend Shantallow Shanvey Straidarran Strathfoyle Straw Swatragh Tamlaght Tamnaherin The Loup Tobermore Traad Upperlands Landforms Aughlish Ballynahone Bog Binevenagh Corick Glenshane Pass Lough Beg Lough Enagh Lough Foyle Magilligan Roe Valley Sperrins Baronies Coleraine Keenaght Loughinsholin North East Liberties of Coleraine North West Liberties of Londonderry Tirkeeran WikiProject Northern Ireland WikiProject Ireland Northern Ireland Portal United Kingdom Portal Ireland Portal v t e Cities in Ireland Republic of Ireland Dublin Cork Limerick Galway Waterford Kilkenny   1 Northern Ireland Belfast Derry Lisburn Newry Armagh 1 not an administrative city v t e Cities of the United Kingdom England Bath Birmingham Bradford Brighton and Hove Bristol Cambridge Canterbury Carlisle Chelmsford Chester Chichester Coventry Derby Durham Ely Exeter Gloucester Hereford Kingston upon Hull Lancaster Leeds Leicester Lichfield Lincoln Liverpool London Manchester Newcastle upon Tyne Norwich Nottingham Oxford Peterborough Plymouth Portsmouth Preston Ripon St Albans Salford Salisbury Sheffield Southampton Stoke-on-Trent Sunderland Truro Wakefield Wells Westminster Winchester Wolverhampton Worcester York Scotland Aberdeen Dundee Edinburgh Glasgow Inverness Perth Stirling Wales Bangor Cardiff Newport St Asaph St Davids Swansea Northern Ireland Armagh Belfast Derry Lisburn Newry (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.log.warn("Gadget \"teahouse\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"ReferenceTooltips\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"featured-articles-links\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");}); Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Derry oldid=742290939 " Categories : Derry County Londonderry County towns in Northern Ireland University towns in the United Kingdom Fortified settlements Port cities and towns in Northern Ireland Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2010 Articles with Wayback Machine links Articles with dead external links from May 2016 Articles with dead external links from September 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from August 2014 EngvarB from August 2014 Articles containing Scots-language text Articles containing Irish-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2010 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012 Articles that mention track gauge 1600 mm Articles that mention track gauge 914 mm Articles that mention track gauge 1435 mm Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011 Vague or ambiguous time from October 2011 Articles with DMOZ links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa Қазақша Kernowek Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malti Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پنجابی Polski Português Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 2 October 2016, at 21:10. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.loader.load(["ext.cite.a11y","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.action.view.postEdit","site","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.searchSuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.ReferenceTooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.DRN-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.refToolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.visualEditor.targetLoader","ext.eventLogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaEvents","ext.navigationTiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.centralNotice.geoIP","ext.centralNotice.startUp"]);}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set( { "wgPageParseReport": { "limitreport": { "cputime": "1.464", "walltime": "1.655", "ppvisitednodes": { "value": 12258, "limit": 1000000 }, "ppgeneratednodes": { "value": 0, "limit": 1500000 }, "postexpandincludesize": { "value": 313439, "limit": 2097152 }, "templateargumentsize": { "value": 17344, "limit": 2097152 }, "expansiondepth": { "value": 26, "limit": 40 }, "expensivefunctioncount": { "value": 29, "limit": 500 }, "entityaccesscount": { "value": 1, "limit": 400 }, "timingprofile": [ "100.00% 1367.434 1 -total", " 49.56% 677.725 1 Template:Reflist", " 25.96% 354.946 100 Template:Cite_web", " 8.72% 119.191 1 Template:Infobox_UK_place", " 6.69% 91.542 25 Template:Cite_news", " 6.58% 89.974 11 Template:Fix", " 5.00% 68.387 5 Template:Citation_needed", " 4.68% 64.012 1 Template:Weather_box", " 4.67% 63.870 25 Template:Category_handler", " 3.75% 51.287 6 Template:Delink" ] }, "scribunto": { "limitreport-timeusage": { "value": "0.674", "limit": "10.000" }, "limitreport-memusage": { "value": 12914120, "limit": 52428800 } }, "cachereport": { "origin": "mw1185", "timestamp": "20161021144149", "ttl": 3600, "transientcontent": true } } } );}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgBackendResponseTime":63,"wgHostname":"mw1255"});});