Genoa - Wikipedia document.documentElement.className = document.documentElement.className.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" ); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgCanonicalNamespace":"","wgCanonicalSpecialPageName":false,"wgNamespaceNumber":0,"wgPageName":"Genoa","wgTitle":"Genoa","wgCurRevisionId":745542416,"wgRevisionId":745542416,"wgArticleId":47332321,"wgIsArticle":true,"wgIsRedirect":false,"wgAction":"view","wgUserName":null,"wgUserGroups":["*"],"wgCategories":["CS1 Italian-language sources (it)","CS1 errors: external links","All articles with dead external links","Articles with dead external links from June 2016","Articles with Wayback Machine links","Articles with dead external links from April 2016","Articles containing Italian-language text","Coordinates on Wikidata","All articles with unsourced statements","Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012","Pages using weather box with unknown parameters","Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006","All articles containing potentially dated statements","Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata","Cities and towns in Liguria","Communes of the Province of Genoa","Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers","Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers","Genoa","Italian Riviera","Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy","Roman towns and cities in Italy","Capitals of former nations","World Heritage Sites in Italy"],"wgBreakFrames":false,"wgPageContentLanguage":"en","wgPageContentModel":"wikitext","wgSeparatorTransformTable":["",""],"wgDigitTransformTable":["",""],"wgDefaultDateFormat":"dmy","wgMonthNames":["","January","February","March","April","May","June","July","August","September","October","November","December"],"wgMonthNamesShort":["","Jan","Feb","Mar","Apr","May","Jun","Jul","Aug","Sep","Oct","Nov","Dec"],"wgRelevantPageName":"Genoa","wgRelevantArticleId":47332321,"wgRequestId":"WApmigpAIDgAAG8Q8tUAAABW","wgIsProbablyEditable":true,"wgRestrictionEdit":[],"wgRestrictionMove":[],"wgWikiEditorEnabledModules":{"toolbar":true,"dialogs":true,"preview":false,"publish":false},"wgBetaFeaturesFeatures":[],"wgMediaViewerOnClick":true,"wgMediaViewerEnabledByDefault":true,"wgVisualEditor":{"pageLanguageCode":"en","pageLanguageDir":"ltr","usePageImages":true,"usePageDescriptions":true},"wgPreferredVariant":"en","wgMFDisplayWikibaseDescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgRelatedArticles":null,"wgRelatedArticlesUseCirrusSearch":true,"wgRelatedArticlesOnlyUseCirrusSearch":false,"wgULSCurrentAutonym":"English","wgNoticeProject":"wikipedia","wgCentralNoticeCookiesToDelete":[],"wgCentralNoticeCategoriesUsingLegacy":["Fundraising","fundraising"],"wgCategoryTreePageCategoryOptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgFlaggedRevsParams":{"tags":{"status":{"levels":1,"quality":2,"pristine":3}}},"wgStableRevisionId":null,"wgCoordinates":{"lat":44.411111111111,"lon":8.9327777777778},"wgWikibaseItemId":"Q1449","wgCentralAuthMobileDomain":false,"wgVisualEditorToolbarScrollOffset":0,"wgEditSubmitButtonLabelPublish":false});mw.loader.state({"ext.globalCssJs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","user.cssprefs":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"loading","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediaBadges":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonPrint":"ready","mediawiki.sectionAnchor":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.user":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.options@0j3lz3q",function($,jQuery,require,module){mw.user.options.set({"variant":"en"});});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@1dqfd7l",function ( $, jQuery, require, module ) { mw.user.tokens.set({"editToken":"+\\","patrolToken":"+\\","watchToken":"+\\","csrfToken":"+\\"});/*@nomin*/; });mw.loader.load(["mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.legacy.wikibits","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.init","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","skins.vector.js"]);}); Genoa From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation , search This article is about the Italian port city. For other uses, see Genoa (disambiguation) and Genova (disambiguation) . Genoa 

Genova Comune Comune di Genova A collage of Genoa, clockwise from top left: Lighthouse of Genoa , Piazza de Ferrari , Galleria Mazzini, Brigata Liguria Street, view of San Teodoro from Port of Genoa 

Flag 

Coat of arms Genoa Location of Genoa in Italy Coordinates: 44°24′40″N 8°55′58″E ﻿ / ﻿ 44.41111°N 8.93278°E ﻿ / 44.41111; 8.93278 Coordinates : 44°24′40″N 8°55′58″E ﻿ / ﻿ 44.41111°N 8.93278°E ﻿ / 44.41111; 8.93278 Country Italy Region Liguria Province / Metropolitan city Genoa (GE) Government • Mayor Marco Doria ( SI ) Area • Total 243.60 km 2 (94.05 sq mi) Elevation 20 m (70 ft) Population (30 April 2015) • Total 588,688 • Density 2,400/km 2 (6,300/sq mi) Demonym(s) Genovesi, Genoese Time zone CET ( UTC+1 ) • Summer ( DST ) CEST ( UTC+2 ) Postal code 16121-16167 Dialing code 010 Patron saint John the Baptist Saint day June 24 Website Official website 

Genoa ( / ˈ dʒ ɛ n oʊ . ə / JEN -oh-ə ; Italian : Genova [ˈdʒɛːnova] ( listen ) ; Genoese and Ligurian Zena [ˈzeːna] ; Latin and archaic English Genua ) is the capital of Liguria and the sixth largest city in Italy with a population of 588,688 [1] within its administrative limits on a land area of 243.6 km 2 (94 sq mi). The urban area called Genoa Metropolitan City has an official population of 862,885. [2] Over 1.5 million [2] people live in the Genoa Metropolitan Area . Genoa is one of Europe's largest cities on the Mediterranean Sea and the largest seaport in Italy. 

Genoa has been nicknamed la Superba ("the Proud one") due to its glorious past and impressive landmarks. [3] Part of the old town of Genoa was inscribed on the World Heritage List (UNESCO) in 2006 (see below). The city's rich cultural history in notably its art , music and cuisine allowed it to become the 2004 European Capital of Culture . It is the birthplace of Christopher Columbus , Niccolò Paganini and Giuseppe Mazzini 

Genoa, which forms the southern corner of the Milan-Turin-Genoa industrial triangle of north-west Italy, is one of the country’s major economic centres. [4] [5] The city has hosted massive shipyards and steelworks since the 19th century, and its solid financial sector dates back to the Middle Ages. The Bank of Saint George , founded in 1407, is among the oldest in the world and has played an important role in the city’s prosperity since the middle of the 15th century. [6] [7] Today a number of leading Italian companies are based in the city, including Selex ES , [8] Ansaldo Energia , [9] Ansaldo STS , Edoardo Raffinerie Garrone , Piaggio Aerospace and Costa Cruises . 

Contents 1 History 1.1 Prehistory and antiquity 1.2 Middle ages and Renaissance 1.3 Modern history 2 Flag 3 Geography 3.1 Climate 4 Government 4.1 Municipal government 4.1.1 Administrative subdivision 5 Cityscape 5.1 Main sights 5.2 Churches 5.3 Buildings and palaces 5.4 Old harbour 5.5 Walls and fortresses 5.6 Parks 5.7 Promenades 6 Demographics 7 Economy 8 Culture 8.1 Aquarium of Genoa 8.2 Visual art 8.3 Music 8.4 Language 8.5 Sports 8.6 Cuisine 8.7 People 9 Education 10 Transport 10.1 Ports 10.2 Air transport 10.3 Public transport 11 International relations 12 Notable people 13 See also 14 References 15 Bibliography 16 External links 

History [ edit ] See also: Timeline of Genoa Prehistory and antiquity [ edit ] The Polcevera bronze tablet, evidence of the Roman and pre-Roman past of Genoa. 

The city cemetery, dating from the 6th and 5th centuries BC, testifies to the occupation of the site by the Greeks , but the fine harbour probably saw use much earlier, perhaps by the Etruscans . The ancient Ligurian city was known as Stalia (Σταλìα), so referred to by Artemidorus Ephesius and Pomponius Mela (this toponym is possibly preserved in the name of Staglieno, some 3 km (2 mi) from the coast). Ligurian Stalia was overshadowed by the powerful Marseille and Vada Sabatia , near modern Savona . Stalia had an alliance with Rome through a foedus aequum ("equal pact") in the course of the Second Punic War (218-201 BC). The Carthaginians accordingly destroyed it in 209 BC. The town was rebuilt and, after the Carthaginian Wars ended in 146 BC. it received municipal rights. The original castrum thenceforth expanded towards the current areas of Santa Maria di Castello and the San Lorenzo promontory. Trades included skins, wood, and honey. Goods were shipped to the mainland, up to major cities like Tortona and Piacenza . 

The city's current name derives from the Latin word meaning "knee" ( genu ; plural, genua ), from its geographical position at the centre of the Ligurian coastal arch, thus akin to the name of Geneva . [10] The Latin name, oppidum Genua , is recorded by Pliny the Elder ( Nat. Hist. 3.48) as part of the Augustean Regio IX Liguria . 

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire the Ostrogoths occupied Genoa. After the Gothic War , the Byzantines made it the seat of their vicar . When the Lombards invaded Italy in 568, Bishop Honoratus of Milan fled and held his seat in Genoa. [11] Pope Gregory the Great was closely connected to these bishops in exile, for example involving himself the election of Deusdedit. [12] The Lombards, under King Rothari , finally captured Genoa and other Ligurian cities in about 643. [13] In 773 the Lombard Kingdom was annexed by the Frankish Empire ; the first Carolingian count of Genoa was Ademarus, who was given the title praefectus civitatis Genuensis . Ademarus died in Corsica while fighting against the Saracens. In this period the Roman walls, destroyed by the Lombards, were rebuilt and extended. 

For the following several centuries, Genoa was little more than a small centre, slowly building its merchant fleet which was to become the leading commercial carrier of the Mediterranean Sea . The town was thoroughly sacked and burned in 934-35 by a Fatimid fleet under Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Tamimi and likely abandoned for a few years. [14] In the 10th century the city, now part of the Marca Januensis (" Genoese March ") was under the Obertenghi family, whose first member was Obertus I . Genoa became one of the first cities in Italy to have some citizenship rights granted by local feudatories. [ citation needed ] Middle ages and Renaissance [ edit ] Main article: Republic of Genoa Portrait of Christopher Columbus by Ridolfo Ghirlandaio 

Before 1100, Genoa emerged as an independent city-state , one of a number of Italian city-states during this period. Nominally, the Holy Roman Emperor was sovereign and the Bishop of Genoa was head of state; however, actual power was wielded by a number of " consuls " annually elected by popular assembly. Genoa was one of the so-called "Maritime Republics" ( Repubbliche Marinare ), along with Venice , Pisa , and Amalfi . Trade, shipbuilding, and banking helped support one of the largest and most powerful navies in the Mediterranean . The Adorno , Campofregoso, and other smaller merchant families all fought for power in this republic, as the power of the consuls allowed each family faction to gain wealth and power in the city. The Republic of Genoa extended over modern Liguria , Piedmont , Sardinia , Corsica and Nice , and it had practically complete control of the Tyrrhenian Sea . Through Genoese participation on the Crusades , colonies were established in the Middle East , Aegean , Sicily and Northern Africa . Genoese Crusaders brought home a green glass goblet from the Levant , which Genoese long regarded as the Holy Grail . Not all of Genoa's merchandise was so innocuous, however, as medieval Genoa became a major player in the slave trade. [15] The iconic Lanterna , renaissance lighthouse of Genoa built in 1543 

The collapse of the Crusader States was offset by Genoa’s alliance with the Byzantine Empire . As Venice's relations with the Byzantines were temporarily disrupted by the Fourth Crusade and its aftermath, Genoa was able to improve its position. Genoa took advantage of the opportunity to expand into the Black Sea and Crimea . Internal feuds between the powerful families, the Grimaldi and Fieschi , the Doria , Spinola and others, caused much disruption, but in general the republic was run much as a business affair. In 1218–1220 Genoa was served by the Guelph podestà Rambertino Buvalelli , who probably introduced Occitan literature to the city, which was soon to boast such troubadours as Jacme Grils , Lanfranc Cigala and Bonifaci Calvo . Genoa's political zenith came with its victory over the Republic of Pisa at the naval Battle of Meloria in 1284, and with a temporary victory over its rival, Venice, at the naval Battle of Curzola in 1298. The Genoese navy was at par with the Venitian navy and both cities had the power to rule the sea. 

However, this prosperity did not last. The Black Death was imported into Europe in 1347 from the Genoese trading post at Caffa ( Theodosia ) in Crimea on the Black Sea. Following the economic and population collapse, Genoa adopted the Venetian model of government, and was presided over by a doge (see Doge of Genoa ). The wars with Venice continued, and the War of Chioggia (1378–1381)-- where Genoa almost managed to decisively subdue Venice—ended with Venice's recovery of dominance in the Adriatic. In 1390 Genoa initiated the Barbary Crusade with help from the French and laid siege to Mahdia . Though it has not been well-studied, the 15th century seems to have been a tumultuous time for Genoa. The city had a strong tradition for trading Levant goods and its financial expertise was recognized all over Europe. After a period of French domination from 1394 to 1409, Genoa came under rule by the Visconti of Milan . Genoa lost Sardinia to Aragon , Corsica to internal revolt, and its Middle Eastern , Eastern European , and Asia Minor colonies to the Turkish Ottoman Empire . 

Genoa was able to stabilise its position as it moved into the 16th century, particularly thanks to the efforts of doge Andrea Doria , who granted a new constitution in 1528, making Genoa a satellite of the Spanish Empire. Under the ensuing economic recovery, many aristocratic Genoese families, such as the Balbi, Doria, Grimaldi, Pallavicini and Serra, amassed tremendous fortunes. According to Felipe Fernandez-Armesto and others, the practices Genoa developed in the Mediterranean (such as chattel slavery) were crucial in the exploration and exploitation of the New World. [16] Christopher Columbus himself was a native of Genoa and donated one-tenth of his income from the discovery of the Americas for Spain to the Bank of Saint George in Genoa for the relief of taxation on food. View of Genoa in 1572. 

At the time of Genoa’s zenith in the 16th century, the city attracted many artists, including Rubens , Caravaggio and Van Dyck . The famed architect Galeazzo Alessi (1512–1572) designed many of the city’s splendid palazzi , and Bartolomeo Bianco (1590–1657) designed the centrepieces of University of Genoa . A number of Genoese Baroque and Rococo artists settled elsewhere and a number of local artists became prominent. 

However, in the 17th century, Genoa entered a period of crisis. In May 1625 a French-Savoian army invaded the republic, but was successfully driven out by the combined Spanish and Genoese armies. In 1656-57, a new outburst of plague killed as much as half of the population. [17] In May 1684, as a punishment for Genoese support for Spain, the city was subjected to a French naval bombardment , with some 13,000 cannonballs aimed at the city. [18] Genoa was eventually occupied by Austria in 1746 during the War of the Austrian Succession . This episode in the city's history is mainly remembered for the Genoese revolt, precipitated by a legendary boy named Giovan Battista Perasso and nicknamed Balilla , who threw a stone at an Austrian official and became a national hero to later generations of Genoese (and Italians in general). Unable to retain its rule in Corsica , where the rebel Corsican Republic was proclaimed in 1755, Genoa was forced by the endemic rebellion to sell its claim to Corsica to the French, in the Treaty of Versailles of 1768. Modern history [ edit ] Genoa in 1810 

With the shift in world economy and trade routes to the New World and away from the Mediterranean, Genoa's political and economic power went into steady decline. In 1797, under pressure from Napoleon , Genoa became a French protectorate called the Ligurian Republic , which was annexed by France in 1805. This affair is commemorated in the famous first sentence of Tolstoy 's War and Peace : 

Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the Buonapartes.(...) And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan, the comedy of the people of Genoa and Lucca laying their petitions [to be annexed to France] before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of the nations?" (spoken by a thoroughly anti-Boanapartist Russian aristocrat, soon after the news reached Saint Petersburg ). 

Although the Genoese revolted against France in 1814 and liberated the city on their own, delegates at the Congress of Vienna sanctioned its incorporation into Piedmont ( Kingdom of Sardinia ), thus ending the three century old struggle by the House of Savoy to acquire the city. Garibaldi leading the Expedition of the Thousand . 

The city soon gained a reputation as a hotbed of anti-Savoy republican agitation (having its climax in 1849 with the Sack of Genoa ), although the union with Savoy was economically very beneficial. With the growth of the Risorgimento movement, the Genoese turned their struggles from Giuseppe Mazzini 's vision of a local republic into a struggle for a unified Italy under a liberalised Savoy monarchy. In 1860, General Giuseppe Garibaldi set out from Genoa with over a thousand volunteers to begin the conquest of Southern Italy . Today a monument is set on the rock where the patriots departed from. 

In the late 19th century and the early 20th century, Genoa consolidated its role as a major seaport and an important steel and shipbuilding centre. During World War II , Genoa suffered heavy damages, from both naval and aerial bombings. The city was liberated by the partisans a few days before the arrival of the Allies. 

In the post-war years, Genoa played a pivotal role in the Italian economic miracle , as the third corner of the so-called "Industrial Triangle" of Northern Italy , formed by the manufacturer hubs of Milan and Turin and the seaport of Genoa itself. Since 1962, the Genoa International Boat Show has evolved as one of the largest annually recurring events in Genoa. The 27th G8 summit in the city, in July 2001, was overshadowed by violent protests, with one protester, Carlo Giuliani , killed. In 2007, 15 officials, including police, prison officials and two doctors, were found guilty by an Italian court of mistreating protesters. A judge handed down prison sentences ranging from five months to five years. [19] In 2004, the European Union designated Genoa as the European Capital of Culture , along with the French city of Lille . Flag [ edit ] St George's flag flying on Doge's Palace, Genoa . Vexillum beati Georgii , as depicted on the Flag of Moscow . 

The flag of Genoa is simply a St George's Cross , a red cross on a lime white field; thus, it is identical to the flag of England . The patron saint of Genoa was Saint Lawrence of Rome until at least 958, but the Genoese transferred their allegiance to Saint George at some point during the 11th or 12th century, most likely under the impression of the rising popularity of the "warrior saint" during the crusades . Genoa also had a banner displaying a cross since at least 1218, possibly as early as 1113. [20] But the cross banner was not associated with the saint; indeed, the saint had his own flag, the vexillum beati Georgii (first mentioned 1198), a red flag showing a George and the dragon. A depiction of this flag is shown in the Genoese annals under the year 1227. The Genoese flag with the red cross was used alongside this "Saint George's flag", from at least 1218, known as the insignia cruxata comunis Janue ("cross ensign of the commune of Genoa"). The saint's flag was the city's main war flag, but the cross flag was used alongside it in the 1240s. [21] The Saint George's flag (i.e. the flag depicting the saint) remained the main flag of Genoa at least until the 1280s. The flag now known as the "St George's Cross" seems to have replaced it as Genoa's main flag at some point during the 14th century. The Book of Knowledge of All Kingdoms (c. 1385) shows it, inscribed with the word iustiçia , and described as: 

And the lord of this place has as his ensign a white pennant with a red cross. At the top it is inscribed with 'justice', in this manner. [22] Geography [ edit ] A panoramic view of Genoa (click to enlarge) 

The city of Genoa covers an area of 243 square kilometres (94 sq mi) between the Ligurian Sea and the Apennine Mountains . The city stretches along the coast for about 30 kilometres (19 mi) from the neighbourhood of Voltri to Nervi, and for 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) from the coast to the north along the valleys Polcevera and Bisagno . The territory of Genoa can then be popularly divided into 5 main zones: the centre, the west, the east, the Polcevera and the Bisagno Valley. 

Genoa is adjacent to two popular Ligurian vacation spots, Camogli and Portofino . In the metropolitan area of Genoa lies Aveto Natural Regional Park . Climate [ edit ] 

Genoa has a borderline humid subtropical ( Cfa ) and Mediterranean climate ( Csa ) in the Köppen climate classification, since only one summer month has less than 40 millimetres (1.57 in) of rainfall, preventing it from being classified as solely humid subtropical or Mediterranean. 

The average yearly temperature is around 19 °C (66 °F) during the day and 13 °C (55 °F) at night. In the coldest months: December, January and February, the average temperature is 12 °C (54 °F) during the day and 6 °C (43 °F) at night. In the warmest months – July and August – the average temperature is 27.5 °C (82 °F) during the day and 21 °C (70 °F) at night. The daily temperature range is limited, with an average range of about 6 °C (11 °F) between high and low temperatures. 

Annually, the average 2.9 of nights recorded temperatures of ≤0 °C (32 °F) (mainly in January). The coldest temperature ever recorded was −8 °C (18 °F) on the night of February 2012; the highest temperature ever recorded during the day is 38.5 °C (101 °F) on the August 2015. Average annual number of days with temperatures of ≥30 °C (86 °F) is about 8, average four days in July and August. [23] 

Average annual temperature of the sea is 17.5 °C (64 °F), from 13 °C (55 °F) in the period January–March to 25 °C (77 °F) in August. In the period from June to October, the average sea temperature exceeds 19 °C (66 °F). [24] 

Genoa is also a windy city, especially during winter when northern winds often bring cool air from the Po Valley (usually accompanied by lower temperatures, high pressure and clear skies). Another typical wind blows from southeast , mostly as a consequence of atlantic disturbances and storms, bringing humid and warmer air from the sea. Snowfall is sporadic, but does occur almost every year, albeit big amounts in the city centre are rare. [25] [26] 

Annual average relative humidity is 68%, ranging from 63% in February to 73% in May. [23] 

Sunshine hours total above 2,200 per year, from an average 4 hours of sunshine duration per day in winter to average 9 hours in summer. This value is an average between the northern half of Europe and North Africa. [24] Climate data for Genoa Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year Average high °C (°F) 11.5 

(52.7) 12.2 

(54) 14.6 

(58.3) 16.8 

(62.2) 20.5 

(68.9) 23.9 

(75) 27.3 

(81.1) 27.7 

(81.9) 24.4 

(75.9) 20.0 

(68) 15.1 

(59.2) 12.5 

(54.5) 18.9 

(66) Daily mean °C (°F) 8.5 

(47.3) 9.1 

(48.4) 11.4 

(52.5) 13.7 

(56.7) 17.4 

(63.3) 20.8 

(69.4) 24.1 

(75.4) 24.4 

(75.9) 21.1 

(70) 16.9 

(62.4) 12.2 

(54) 9.5 

(49.1) 15.7 

(60.3) Average low °C (°F) 5.5 

(41.9) 6.0 

(42.8) 8.2 

(46.8) 10.5 

(50.9) 14.2 

(57.6) 17.6 

(63.7) 20.9 

(69.6) 21.0 

(69.8) 17.9 

(64.2) 13.8 

(56.8) 9.2 

(48.6) 6.5 

(43.7) 12.6 

(54.7) Average rainfall mm (inches) 101.8 

(4.008) 74.0 

(2.913) 81.7 

(3.217) 88.0 

(3.465) 72.4 

(2.85) 58.2 

(2.291) 24.2 

(0.953) 69.3 

(2.728) 136.4 

(5.37) 171.3 

(6.744) 108.8 

(4.283) 93.1 

(3.665) 1,079.2 

(42.488) Average rainy days (≥ 1.0 mm) 7.7 5.6 6.9 8.1 7.0 5.0 2.8 5.0 6.0 8.0 7.1 6.5 75.7 Average snowy days 0.9 0.5 0.2 — — — — — — — — 0.7 2.3 Mean monthly sunshine hours 117.8 130.5 158.1 192.0 220.1 246.0 294.5 266.6 201.0 173.6 111.0 111.6 2,222.8 Source #1: Servizio Meteorologico , [23] data of sunshine hours [27] Source #2: Rivista Ligure "La neve sulle coste del Maditerraneo" [28] The parameter "date 1" is not recognized by Template:Weather box The parameter "date 2" is not recognized by Template:Weather box Government [ edit ] Municipal government [ edit ] 

The Municipal Council of Genoa is currently led by a left-wing majority, elected in May 2012. The mayor is Marco Doria , expression of a progressive alliance composed by Democratic Party , Italy of Values , Left Ecology Freedom , Communist Refoundation Party and other minor lists. Administrative subdivision [ edit ] 

The city of Genoa is subdivided into 9 Municipi (administrative districts), as approved by the Municipal Council in 2007. [29] The 9 districts of Genoa Municipio Population (% of total) Quarters included Centro-Est 91,402 (15.0%) Pré, Molo, Maddalena, Oregina, Lagaccio, San Nicola, Castelletto , Manin, San Vincenzo, Carignano Centro-Ovest 66,626 (10.9%) Sampierdarena , Campasso, San Teodoro, San Bartolomeo Bassa Val Bisagno 78,791 (12.9%) San Fruttuoso, Marassi, Quezzi Media Val Bisagno 58,742 (9,6%) Staglieno, Sant'Eusebio, San Gottardo, Molassana, Struppa Valpolcevera 62,492 (10.3%) Borzoli, Fegino, Certosa, Rivarolo , Teglia, Begato, Bolzaneto , Morego, San Quirico, Pontedecimo Medio Ponente 61,810 (10.1%) Sestri , Cornigliano , Campi Ponente 63,027 (10.3%) Crevari, Voltri , Palmaro, Prà, Pegli , Multedo Medio Levante 61,759 (10.1%) Foce, Brignole, Albaro , San Martino, San Giuliano, Lido, Puggia Levante 66,155 (10.8%) Sturla , Quarto , Quinto, Nervi , Sant'Ilario, Bavari, San Desiderio, Borgoratti Cityscape [ edit ] A view of Piazza de Ferrari A panoramic image showing the port of Genoa at night-time, which has brought trade, commerce and wealth to the city for centuries, greatly contributing to its cultural and historical heritage. Main sights [ edit ] Doge's Palace , ancient seat of the government of the oligarghic republic. Royal Palace of Genoa, 16th century. Palace of Saint George , built in 1260. St. Lawrence Cathedral . Medieval gates of Genoa are a rare survivor of the city's oldest buildings. 

Genoa's historic centre is articulated in a maze of squares and narrow caruggi (typical genoese alleys). It joins a medieval dimension with following 16th century and Baroque interventions ( San Matteo square and the ancient via Aurea, now via Garibaldi ). 

Remains of the ancient 17th century walls are still visible nearby San Lorenzo cathedral , the most attended place of worship of Genoa. 

The symbols of the city are the Lanterna (the lighthouse) (117 m high), old and standing lighthouse visible in the distance from the sea (beyond 30 km), and the monumental fountain of Piazza De Ferrari , recently restored, out-and-out core of the city's life. 

Another tourist destination is the ancient seaside district of Boccadasse , with its multicolour boats, set as a seal to Corso Italia , the promenade which runs along the Lido d'Albaro, and known for its ice-creams. 

Just out of the city centre, but still part of the 33 km (21 mi) of coast included in the municipality's territory, are Nervi , natural doorway to the Ligurian East Riviera , and Pegli , the point of access to the West Riviera . 

The new Genoa based its rebirth upon the restoration of the green areas of the immediate inland parts (among them the Regional Natural Park of Beigua) and upon the realisation of facilities such as the Aquarium in the Old Harbour - the biggest in Italy and one of the major in Europe - and its Marina (the tourist small port which holds hundreds of pleasure boats). All of this inside the restored Expo Area, arranged in occasion of the Columbian Celebrations of 1992. 

The regained pride gave back to the city the consciousness of being capable of looking to the future without forgetting its past. The resumption of several flourishing hand-crafting activities, far-back absent from the caruggi of the old town, is a direct evidence of it. 

The restoration of many of Genoa's churches and palaces in the 1980s and the 1990s contributed to the city's rebirth. A notable example the Renaissance Basilica of Santa Maria Assunta , sitting on the top of the hill of Carignano and visible from almost every part of the city. 

The total restoration of Doge's Palace - once venue of dogi and senators and nowadays location of cultural events - and of the Old Harbour and the rebuilding of Teatro Carlo Felice , destroyed by the Second World War bombings that only spared the neoclassic pronao of the architect Carlo Barabino , were two more points of strength for the realisation of a new Genoa. 

Genoa could not renounce, especially as from the 1960s, to a great renewal, which as happened in several other metropolis, should necessarily get through the realisation of big council houses' complexes, whose quality, utility and functionality has been and still is controversial for those residents living there. Concerning this, the most known cases are those of the so-called "biscione", a development in the shape of a long snake, situated on the hills of the populous district of Marassi , and the one of the group of houses known as "Le Lavatrici" (the washing machines), in the district of Prà. 

In 1992, in occasion of the Columbian Celebrations ("Colombiadi"). The waterfront was completely restored and symbolised by the stylised "Great Bigo" (a sort of trademark of the Genoese portual activity). 

Beyond a complete restyling of the area, the ancient port zone nearby the Mandraccio opening, in Porta Siberia, was enriched by Genoese architect Renzo Piano with a large sphere made of metal and glass, installed in the port's waters, not far from the Aquarium, and unveiled in 2001 in occasion of the G8 Summit held in Genoa. The sphere (called by the citizens "Piano's bubble" or "The Ball"), after hosting an exposition of fens from Genoa's Botanical Gardens, currently houses the reconstruction of a tropical environment, with several plants, little animals and butterflies. Piano also designed the subway stations and, in the hills area, the construction - in collaboration with UNESCO - of Punta Nave, base of the Renzo Piano Building Workshop . 

Nearby the Old Harbour is the so-called " Matitone ", a skyscraper in shape of a pencil, that lays side by side with the group of the WTC towers, core of the San Benigno development, today base of part of the Municipality's administration and of several companies. Churches [ edit ] 

St. Lawrence Cathedral (Cattedrale di San Lorenzo) is the city's cathedral, built in a Romanesque-Renaissance style. Other major churches in Genoa include the commandery of the Order of Saint John called Commenda di San Giovanni di Pré, San Matteo , San Donato , Santi Cosma e Damiano, Genoa , Santa Maria di Castello , Sant'Agostino , the Oratory of San Giacomo della Marina , Santo Stefano , San Torpete , Basilica della Santissima Annunziata del Vastato , San Filippo Neri, Genoa , San Pietro in Banchi, Genoa , Santa Maria delle Vigne , Santi Vittore e Carlo, Genoa , Santissimo Nome di Maria e degli Angeli Custodi, Genoa , San Siro , Santa Maria Assunta, Genoa . Most of these churches and basilicas are built in the Romanesque style, with the exception of Santissima Annunziata del Vastato which features an elaborate Baroque appearance. 

Several churches in the area ring bells calling the faithful to mass, one of which, situated on the hillside above Genoa is the San Francisco de Paoli (SFdP). This cathedral is notable in that the outer courtyard overlooking the port is a memorial to all those who died at sea. The SFdP church is of artistic mention in that the tile depictions of the Via de la Croce Stations along the brick path to the church were made in Napoli in 1930. Buildings and palaces [ edit ] UNESCO World Heritage Site Genoa: Le Strade Nuove and the system of the Palazzi dei Rolli Name as inscribed on the World Heritage List Type Cultural Criteria ii, iv Reference 1211 UNESCO region Europe and North America Inscription history Inscription 2006 (30th Session ) 

The main features of central Genoa include Piazza De Ferrari , around which are sited the Opera and the Palace of the Doges . There is also a house where Christopher Columbus is said to have been born. 

Strada Nuova (now Via Garibaldi), in the old city, was inscribed on the World Heritage List in 2006. This district was designed in the mid-16th century to accommodate Mannerist palaces of the city's most eminent families, including Palazzo Rosso (now a museum), Palazzo Bianco , Palazzo Grimaldi and Palazzo Reale . Palazzo Bianco and Palazzo Rosso are also known as Musei di Strada Nuova. The famous art college is also located on this street. 

Other landmarks of the city include the Palazzo del Principe, the Palazzo Cicala , the Old Harbour (Porto Antico), transformed into a mall by architect Renzo Piano , and the famous cemetery of Staglieno , renowned for its monuments and statues, in which the mortal remains of several known personalities rest, among them Giuseppe Mazzini , Fabrizio De André and Oscar Wilde 's wife, Constance Lloyd . The Edoardo Chiossone Museum of Oriental Art has one of the largest collections of Oriental art in Europe. 

Genoa also has a large aquarium located in the above-mentioned old harbour. The port of Genoa also contains an ancient lighthouse , called " La Lanterna ". Old harbour [ edit ] 

The old harbour ("porto antico" in Italian) is the ancient part of the port of Genoa. Renzo Piano redeveloped the area for public access, restoring the historical buildings (like the Cotton warehouses) and creating new landmarks like the Aquarium, the Bigo and recently the "Bolla" (the Sphere). The main touristic attractions of this area are the famous Aquarium and the Museum of the Sea (MuMA). In 2007 these attracted almost 1.7 million visitors. [30] Walls and fortresses [ edit ] Main article: Walls of Genoa 

The city of Genoa during its long history at least since 9th century had been defended by different line of walls . To this day, large portions of these walls remain, and Genoa has more and longer walls than any other city in Italy. The main city walls are known as “Ninth century walls”, "Barbarossa Walls" (12th century), "Fourteenth century walls", "Sixteenth century walls" and "New Walls" ("Mura Nuove" in Italian), the more imposing, built in the first half of 17th century on the ridge of hills around the city, having a length of almost 20 km (12 mi). Some fortresses stand along the perimeter of the "New Walls" or close them. Parks [ edit ] Main article: The Parks of Genoa The gardens of Villa Durazzo-Pallavicini 

Genoa has 82,000 square metres of public parks in the city centre, such as Villetta Di Negro which is right in the heart of the town, overlooking the historical centre. Many bigger green spaces are situated outside the centre: in the east are the Parks of Nervi (96,000 sq m.) overlooking the sea, in the west the beautiful gardens of Villa Durazzo Pallavicini (265,000 sq m.). The numerous villas and palaces of the city also have their own gardens, like Palazzo del Principe, Villa Doria, Palazzo Bianco and Palazzo Tursi, Palazzo Nicolosio Lomellino, Albertis Castle, Villa Rosazza, Villa Croce, Villa Imperiale Cattaneo, Villa Bombrini and many more. [31] Promenades [ edit ] 

Corso Italia runs for 2.5 km (1.6 mi) in the quartiere of Albaro , linking two neighbourhoods of Foce and Boccadasse . The promenade, which was built in 1908, overlooks the sea, towards the promontory of Portofino , and the main landmarks are the small lighthouse of Punta Vagno, the San Giuliano Abbey, the Lido of Albaro. Demographics [ edit ] Historical population Year Pop. ±% 1115 50,000 — 1300 100,000 +100.0% 1400 100,000 +0.0% 1400+ 117,000 +17.0% 1861 242,447 +107.2% 1871 256,486 +5.8% 1881 289,234 +12.8% 1901 377,610 +30.6% 1911 465,496 +23.3% 1921 541,562 +16.3% 1931 590,736 +9.1% 1936 634,646 +7.4% 1951 688,447 +8.5% 1961 784,194 +13.9% 1971 816,872 +4.2% 1981 762,895 −6.6% 1991 678,771 −11.0% 2001 610,307 −10.1% 2011 608,493 −0.3% 2015 588,668 −3.3% Source: ISTAT 2001 [32] [33] [34] 

At the beginning of 2011, there were 608,493 people residing in Genoa, of whom 47% were male and 53% were female. The city is characterised by rapid aging and a long history of demographic decline, that has shown a partial slowdown in the last decade. Genoa has the lowest birth rate and is the most aged of any large Italian city. Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled only 14.12% of the population compared to pensioners who number 26.67%. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06% (minors) and 19.94% (pensioners). The median age of Genoa's residents is 47, compared to the Italian average of 42. The current birth rate of the city is only 7.49 births per 1,000 inhabitants, compared to the national average of 9.45. As of 2006 [update] , 94.23% of the population was Italian . The largest immigrant group is from the Americas (mostly Ecuador ): 2.76%, other European nations (mostly Albania , Ukraine , the former Yugoslavia and Romania ): 1.37%, and North Africa : 0.62%. The city is predominantly Roman Catholic , with small numbers of Protestant adherents. Economy [ edit ] 

The Genoa metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $30.1 billion in 2011, or $33,003 per capita. [35] San Benigno business district. Genoa exhibition centre. 

Ligurian agriculture has increased its specialisation pattern in high-quality products (flowers, wine , olive oil ) and has thus managed to maintain the gross value-added per worker at a level much higher than the national average (the difference was about 42% in 1999). [36] The value of flower production represents over 75% of the agriculture sector turnover, followed by animal farming (11.2%) and vegetable growing (6.4%). 

Steel, once a major industry during the booming 1950s and 1960s, phased out after the late 1980s crisis, as Italy moved away from the heavy industry to pursue more technologically advanced and less polluting productions. So the Ligurian industry has turned towards a widely diversified range of high-quality and high-tech products (food, shipbuilding (in Sestri Ponente and in metropolitan area - Sestri Levante ), electrical engineering and electronics, petrochemicals, aerospace etc.). Nonetheless, the regions still maintains a flourishing shipbuilding sector (yacht construction and maintenance, cruise liner building, military shipyards). [36] In the services sector, the gross value-added per worker in Liguria is 4% above the national average. This is due to the increasing diffusion of modern technologies, particularly in commerce and tourism. A good motorway network (376 km (234 mi) in 2000) makes communications with the border regions relatively easy. The main motorway is located along the coastline, connecting the main ports of Nice (in France), Savona, Genoa and La Spezia. The number of passenger cars per 1000 inhabitants (524 in 2001) is below the national average (584). On average, about 17 million tonnes of cargo are shipped from the main ports of the region and about 57 million tonnes enter the region. [36] The Port of Genoa , with a trade volume of 58.6 million tonnes [37] ranks first in Italy , [38] second in terms of twenty-foot equivalent units after the transshipment port of Gioia Tauro , with a trade volume of over 2 million TEUs. [39] The main destinations for the cargo-passenger traffic are Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Barcelona, and the Canary Islands. 

Some companies based in Genoa include: Ansaldo STS , Ansaldo Energia , Edoardo Raffinerie Garrone , Registro Italiano Navale , Banca Carige , SLAM , Culture [ edit ] Aquarium of Genoa [ edit ] Aquarium of Genoa and biosphere . 

The Aquarium of Genoa (in Italian : Acquario di Genova ) is the largest aquarium in Italy and the second largest in Europe. Built for Genoa Expo '92 , it is an educational, scientific and cultural centre. Its mission is to educate and raise public awareness as regards conservation, management and responsible use of aquatic environments. It welcomes over 1.2 million visitors a year. 

Control of the entire environment, including the temperature, filtration and lighting of the tanks was provided by local Automation Supplier Orsi Automazione , acquired in 2001 by Siemens . The Aquarium of Genoa is co-ordinating the AquaRing EU project. It also provides scientific expertise and a great deal of content for AquaRing, including documents, images, academic content and interactive online courses, via its Online Resource Centre. [40] Visual art [ edit ] See also: Genoese Baroque and Rococo artists Portrait of a Young Man , by Albrecht Dürer . Gallery of Palazzo Rosso . 

Genoa has a rich artistic history, with numerous frescos, paintings, sculptures and other works of art held in the city's abundant museums, palaces, villas, art galleries and piazzas. Genoa is the birthplace and home of the 'Ligurian School', where the key figures were several native and foreign painters, such as Rubens , Van Dyck and Bernardo Strozzi . [41] 

Much of the city's art is found in its churches and palaces, where there are numerous Renaissance, Baroque and Rococo frescos, such as in the Genoa Cathedral , the Church of Gesù and the Church of San Donato . [41] 

Genoa is also famous for its numerous tapestries, which decorated the city's many salons. Whilst the patrician palaces and villas in the city were and still are austere and majestic, the interiors tended to be luxurious and elaborate, often full of tapestries, many of which were Flemish. [41] Music [ edit ] Main article: Music of Genoa 

Genoa was a center of Occitanie culture in Italy and for this reason it developed in Genoa an important school of Troubadours: Lanfranc Cigala , Jacme Grils , Bonifaci Calvo . 

Genoa is the birthplace of the famous violinist and composer Niccolò Paganini The neoclassical Teatro Carlo Felice. 

The Teatro Carlo Felice , built in 1828 in the city in the Piazza De Ferrari, and named for the monarch of the then Kingdom of Sardinia (which included the present regions of Sardinia , Piedmont and Liguria ). The theatre was the centre of music and social life in the 19th century. On various occasions in the history of the theatre, presentations have been conducted by Mascagni , Richard Strauss , Hindemith and Stravinsky . 

On the occasion of the Christopher Columbus celebration in 1992, new musical life was given to the area around the old port, including the restoration of the house of Paganini and presentations of the Trallalero , the traditional singing of Genoese dock workers. Additionally, the city is the site of the Teatro Gustavo Modena, the only theatre to have survived the bombings of World War II relatively intact. The city is the site of the Niccolò Paganini music conservatory. In the town of Santa Margherita Ligure , the ancient Abbey of Cervara is often the site of chamber music concerts. 

The city has also a tradition of folk music in Genoese dialect, like the trallalero (a polyphonic vocal music, performed by five men) and several songs, including the piece " Ma se ghe penso " (English: "But if I think about it"), a nostalgic memory of Genoa by an emigrant to Argentina . 

The genoese singer Natalino Otto started the swing genre in Italy. Genoa in the second half of the twentieth century was a capital of Italian singer songwriter. The Genoese school of Italian singer songwriter include: Umberto Bindi , Luigi Tenco , Gino Paoli , Bruno Lauzi , Fabrizio de André , and then Ivano Fossati and Angelo Branduardi . During the same period were born in Genoa numerous bands of Italian progressive rock like New Trolls . 

"I Madrigalisti di Genova" is a vocal and instrumental group formed in 1958 and specialized in medieval and renaissance repertoire 

In Genoa are numerous Music Festivals, among which: Concerts at San Fruttuoso abbey , Premio Paganini, I Concerti di San Torpete, International Music Festival Genova, We Love Jazz, Gezmatz Festival Workshop. Language [ edit ] Main article: Genoese dialect 

The Genoese dialect ( Zeneize ) is the most important dialect of the Ligurian language , and is commonly spoken in Genoa alongside Italian. Ligurian is listed by Ethnologue as a language in its own right, of the Romance branch, and not to be confused with the ancient Ligurian language . Like the languages of Lombardy , Piedmont , and surrounding regions, it is of Gallo-Italic derivation. Sports [ edit ] 

There are two major football teams in Genoa: Genoa 1893 and Sampdoria ; the former is the oldest football club operating in Italy. The football section of the club was founded in 1893 by James Richardson Spensley , an English doctor, and has won 9 championships (between 1898 and 1924) and 1 Italy Cup (season 1936/1937). U.C. Sampdoria was founded in 1946 from the merger of two existing clubs, Andrea Doria (founded in 1895) and Sampierdarenese (founded in 1911). Sampdoria has won one Italian championship ( Serie A – Season 1990–1991 ), 4 Italy Cups, 1 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1989/90 and 1 Italian Super Cup . Both Genoa C.F.C. and U.C. Sampdoria play their home games in the Luigi Ferraris Stadium , which holds 36,536 spectators. 

In rugby union the city is represented by CUS Genova Rugby , which is the rugby union team of the University of Genoa Sports Centre. CUS Genova had their peak in 1971-1973 when the team was runner-up of the Italian Serie A for three consecutive seasons and contested unsuccessfully the title to Petrarca Rugby . Amongst the CUS Genova players who represented Italy at international level the most relevant were Marco Bollesan and Agostino Puppo . Cuisine [ edit ] Pesto sauce , a popular Genoese dressing. 

Popular foods of Genoese cuisine include pesto sauce, focaccia , farinata , stoccafisso ( stockfish ), and salsa di noci (walnut sauce). Fresh pasta (usually trofie ) with pesto sauce is probably the most iconic among Genoese dishes. Pesto sauce is prepared with fresh basil , pine nuts , grated parmesan , garlic and olive oil pounded together. [42] Another popular dish which is common to Genoa is the minestrone , a thick soup made out of several vegetables and legumes, such as potatoes, beans, green beans, cabbages, pumpkins and zucchini. [43] Other soup dishes which are common to the city include the fish-consisting ciuppin (the precursor to San Francisco's cioppino , buridda , zemin (a soup with garbanzo beans ), sbira and preboggion . [43] Other specialties are Ravioli al sugo (Ravioeu ao tocco), Pansoti di Rapallo (round ravioli filled with hard-boiled egg, spinach and grated cheese), Cappon Magro, Pandolce (Pandoçe) and Sacripantina. Is also known for its cheese filled pizza crust ( focaccia al formaggio ), although it is mainly typical of Recco (a town in the eastern Riviera ), not far from Genoa. People [ edit ] 

Famous Genoese include Sinibaldo and Ottobuono Fieschi (Popes Innocent IV and Adrian V ), Giovanni Battista Cybo (Pope Innocent VIII ) and Giacomo della Chiesa (Pope Benedict XV ), navigators Christopher Columbus , Antonio de Noli , Enrico Alberto d'Albertis , Enrico de Candia ( Henry, Count of Malta ) and Andrea Doria , composers Niccolò Paganini and Michele Novaro , Italian patriots Giuseppe Mazzini , Goffredo Mameli and Nino Bixio , writer and translator Fernanda Pivano , poet Edoardo Sanguineti , Communist politician Palmiro Togliatti , architect Renzo Piano , art curator and critic Germano Celant , Physics 2002 Nobel Prize winner Riccardo Giacconi , Literature 1975 Nobel Prize winner Eugenio Montale , the court painter Giovanni Maria delle Piane (Il Mulinaretto) from the Delle Piane family , artists Vanessa Beecroft , Enrico Accatino , comedians Gilberto Govi , Paolo Villaggio , Beppe Grillo , Luca Bizzarri, Paolo Kessisoglu and Maurizio Crozza; singer-songwriters Fabrizio de André , Ivano Fossati , Umberto Bindi , Bruno Lauzi and Francesco Baccini , while Luigi Tenco and Gino Paoli are also known as Genoese singer-songwriters, although they are respectively from Cassine and Monfalcone ; actor Vittorio Gassman , and actress Moana Pozzi , Giorgio Parodi who conceived the motorcycle company Moto Guzzi with Carlo Guzzi and Giovanni Ravelli. Some reports say the navigator explorer Giovanni Caboto ( John Cabot ) was also from Genoa, others say he was from Savona . Saints from Genoa include Romulus , Syrus , Catherine of Genoa . Among the latest generations, musicians like Andrea Bacchetti, Giulio Plotino, Sergio Ciomei, Lorenzo Cavasanti, Stefano Bagliano and Fabrizio Cipriani, as well as academics and authors like Michele Giugliano and Roberto Dillon, help in keeping the name of the city on the international spotlight in different fields among the arts, technology and culture. Education [ edit ] University of Genoa main building. 

The first organized forms of higher education in Genoa date back to the 13th century when private colleges were entitled to award degrees in Medicine, Philosophy, Theology, Law, Arts. [44] Today the University of Genoa , founded in the 15th century, is one of the largest in Italy, with 11 faculties, 51 departments and 14 libraries. In 2007–2008, the University had 41,000 students and 6,540 graduates. [45] 

Genoa is also home to other colleges and academies: The University of Genoa The Accademia ligustica di belle arti The Accademia Ligure di scienze e lettere The Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia The Renzo Piano Building Workshop The Accademia Italiana della Marina Mercantile The " Niccolò Paganini " Conservatory The Italian Hydrographic Institute The Grazia Deledda Academy and School The Deutsche Schule Genua The Genoa Comics Academy The International School in Genoa The Russian Ballet College 



The Italian Institute of Technology was established in 2003 jointly by the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities and Research and the Italian Minister of Economy and Finance , to promote excellence in basic and applied research. The main fields of research of the Institute are Neuroscience , Robotics , Nanotechnology , Drug discovery . The central research labs and headquarters are located in Morego, in the neighbourhood of Bolzaneto . [46] 

Clemson University , based in South Carolina , United States has a villa in Genoa where architecture students and students in related fields can attend for a semester or year-long study program. 

Florida International University (FIU), based in Miami , Florida , United States also has a small campus in Genoa, with the University of Genoa , which offers classes within the FIU School of Architecture . Transport [ edit ] A view of the commercial port of Genoa Ports [ edit ] Main article: Port of Genoa Panorama of port of Genoa. 

Several cruise and ferry lines serve the passenger terminals in the old port, with a traffic of 3.2 million passengers in 2007. [47] MSC Cruises chose Genoa as one of its main home ports, in competition with the Genoese company Costa Cruises , which moved its home port to Savona . The quays of the passenger terminals extend over an area of 250 thousand square metres, with 5 equipped berths for cruise vessels and 13 for ferries, for an annual capacity of 4 million ferry passengers, 1.5 million cars and 250,000 trucks. [48] The historical maritime station of Ponte dei Mille is today a technologically advanced cruise terminal, with facilities designed after the world's most modern airports, to ensure fast embarking and disembarking of latest generation ships carrying thousand passengers. A third cruise terminal is currently under construction in the redesigned area of Ponte Parodi, once a quay used for grain traffic. 

The Costa Concordia cruise ship, owned by Costs Cruises, is now docked at the port and will be soon be dismantled. [49] Air transport [ edit ] Main article: Genoa Cristoforo Colombo Airport Genoa airport is built on an artificial peninsula. 

The Airport of Genoa ( IATA : GOA , ICAO : LIMJ ) is built on an artificial peninsula, 4 NM (7.4 km; 4.6 mi) west [50] of the city. The airport is currently operated by Aeroporto di Genova S.P.A., which has recently upgraded the airport complex, that now connects Genoa with several daily flights to Rome, Naples, Paris, London, Madrid and Munich. In 2008, 1,202,168 passengers travelled through the airport, [51] with an increase of international destinations and charter flights. Public transport [ edit ] Main article: Railway stations in Genoa Genoa's metropolitan system 

The main railway stations are Genoa Brignole and Genoa Principe , the first situated in the east side of the city centre, close to the business districts and the exhibition centre, while the second is in the west side, close to the port, the university and the historical centre. From these two stations depart the main trains connecting Genoa to France , Turin, Milan and Rome. Genova Brignole railway station 

Genoa's third most important station is Genoa Sampierdarena , which serves the densely populated neighbourhood of Sampierdarena. A total of 23 other local stations serve the other neighbourhoods, on the 30-kilometre-long coast line from Nervi to Voltri , and on the northern line through Bolzaneto and the Polcevera Valley. 

The municipal administration of Genoa is projecting to transform these urban railway lines to be part of the rapid transit system, which now consists of a light metro which connects Brin to the city centre and is called the Metropolitana di Genova ( Genoa Metro ). The metro line has been recently extended to Brignole Station, with the opening of the new station in December 2012. The Corvetto station between De Ferrari and Brignole is currently passed-through. A possible further extension towards the eastern, densely populated boroughs was planned, but the municipal administration is keen to improve the public transport investing in new tram lines instead of completing the extension of the light metro. [52] The current stations of the metro line are Brin-Certosa, Dinegro, Principe, Darsena, San Giorgio, Sant'Agostino and De Ferrari, and the line is 5.3 km (3.3 mi) long. Genova Piazza Principe railway station 

The city's hilly nature has influenced transport provision, and the city is served by three funicular railways (the Zecca–Righi funicular , the Sant'Anna funicular and the Quezzi funicular ), a rack railway (the Principe–Granarolo railway ), and 10 public lifts . [53] 

The city's metro, bus and trolleybus network is operated by AMT (Azienda Mobilità e Trasporti S.p.A.). There is also the Drin Bus - demand responsive transport service (DRT) that connects the hilly, low-density areas of Genoa. [54] [55] [56] International relations [ edit ] See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in Italy 

Genoa is twinned with: [57] Baltimore , United States Columbus , United States Odessa , Ukraine Marseille , France Rijeka , Croatia Beyoğlu , Turkey 

Genoa has bilateral agreements with the following sister cities: [57] [ dead link ] Guayaquil , Ecuador Havana , Cuba Barcelona , Spain Dalian , China Marseille , France Belém , Brazil Athens , Greece Lille , France Saint Petersburg , Russia Yekaterinburg , Russia Acqui Terme , Italy Moscow , Russia Varna , Bulgaria Mantua , Italy Cremona , Italy Ovada , Italy Constanța , Romania Turin , Italy Deva , Romania Siena , Italy Odessa , Ukraine Kiev , Ukraine Nice , France La Paz , Bolivia Azuchi , Japan Bogotá , Colombia Valparaíso , Chile Buenos Aires , Argentina Capo di Ponte , Italy Castelsardo , Italy Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic Tursi , Italy Pointe Noire , Congo Kaolack , Senegal Lattakia , Syria Galata , Turkey Hebron , Palestine El Mina , Lebanon Pizzo Calabro , Italy Polokwane , South Africa Sousse , Tunisia Lyon , France Sumqayıt , Azerbaijan [58] Notable people [ edit ] See also: Category:People from Genoa Doge of Genoa , list of Doges of Genoa Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Genoa , list Syrus of Genoa , Bishop of Genoa Romulus of Genoa , Bishop of Genoa Jacobus de Voragine , Archbishop of Genoa Porchetus , Carthusian monk Nuvolone Alberici , diplomat and statesman Caffaro di Rustico da Caschifellone , diplomat Grimaldo Canella , consul of Genoa Ugo Canefri , crusader Guglielmo Embriaco , merchant and military leader Lamba Doria , Genoese admiral who defeated the venetians in the Battle of Curzola Simone Boccanegra , Doge of Genoa Giovanni da Carignano , priest, pioneering cartographer Pietro Vesconte , cartographer and geographer Andalò del Negro , astronomer and geographer Nicoloso da Recco , navigator from Genoa Luca Tarigo , Genoese explorer Alamanno da Costa , Admiral William Grassus , Admiral Henry, Count of Malta , Genoese adventurer Perceval Doria , Genoese troubadour Bonifaci Calvo , Genoese troubadour Jacme Grils , Genoese troubadour Luchetto Gattilusio , Genoese troubadour Luca Grimaldi , Genoese troubadour Simone Doria , Genoese troubadour Calega Panzan , Genoese troubadour Lanfranc Cigala , Genoese troubadour, man of letters Janus of Cyprus , King of Cyprus Vandino and Ugolino Vivaldi , Genoese explorers and merchants Benedetto I Zaccaria , Admiral Antoniotto Usodimare , Genoese explorer Lancelotto Malocello , explorer and navigator Antonio Malfante , Genoese explorer Giovanni Giustiniani , Genoese captain John Cabot , Genoese explorer and navigator, Antonio de Noli , explorer and navigator Christopher Columbus , explorer and navigator Catherine of Genoa , saint and mystic Virginia Centurione Bracelli , saint Antonius Janue , composer Leon Battista Alberti , humanist author, architect Giovanni Battista Baliani , mathematician, physicist and astronomer Cigalazade Yusuf Sinan Pasha statesman, member of the aristocratic Genoese family of Cicala Gattilusi Family Delle Piane family House of Grimaldi House of Spinola Imperiali family Cavanna family Melfi Family Prince of Belmonte Cybo Family Durazzo family Adorno family Ghisolfi Family Andrea Doria , condottiero and admiral Doria Family Fieschi family Nicolo Paganini , violinist and musical genius Pope Innocent IV Pope Adrian V Pope Innocent VIII Giovanni Paolo Oliva , Superior General of the Society of Jesus Genoese Baroque and Rococo artists , list Rocco Lurago , architect Luca Cambiasi , painter Bernardo Strozzi , painter Giovanni Battista Gaulli , painter Giovanni Benedetto Castiglione , painter Giovanni Bernardo Carboni , painter Giovanni Andrea Podestà , painter Giovanni Maria delle Piane , painter Lazzaro Tavarone , painter Valerio Castello , painter Domenico Piola , painter Anton Maria Maragliano , sculptor Filippo Parodi , sculptor Alessandro Magnasco , painter Giacomo Durazzo , diplomat Louis-Emmanuel Corvetto , lawyer Carlo Barabino , architect Pope Benedict XV Felice Romani , poet, who wrote many librettos for the Opera Giovanni Ruffini , poet Lorenzo Pareto , geologist and statesman Tammar Luxoro , painter Aurelio Craffonara , painter, he moved to Genoa as a boy of 10 years Antonio Varni , painter Alberto Issel , painter Ernesto Rayper , painter and engraver Rubaldo Merello , painter Edoardo Chiossone , engraver and painter Giuseppe Salvago Raggi , diplomat Balilla , Genoese boy who started the revolt against the Habsburg Michele Novaro , songwriter Goffredo Mameli , patriot, author of Italian national anthem, Il Canto degli Italiani Nino Bixio , patriot Giuseppe Mazzini , patriot, politician, journalist, writer, activist. Ausonio Franchi , philosopher and editor Prince Emanuele Filiberto, Duke of Aosta , member of the House of Savoy Raffaele de Ferrari , philanthropist and politician Arturo Issel , explorer, geologist, archeologist Giacomo Doria , explorer, naturalist, botanist Luigi D'Albertis , explorer and naturalist Enrico Alberto d'Albertis , explorer and naturalist Dino Campana , poet, Genoa is a recurring theme of the Dino Campana's poetry Piero Jahier , poet, translator, journalist Francis Yeats-Brown , writer, born in Genoa Raffaele Rossetti , engineer and military naval officer Gio. Ansaldo C. , engineering company founded in Genoa by the genoese Giovanni Ansaldo Renzo Picasso , architect and urban planner Luigi Durand de la Penne , naval driver Enrico Piaggio , industrialist Giuseppe Siri , Archbishop of Genoa Palmiro Togliatti , politician Giuseppe Dossetti , jurist, politician, catholic priest Paolo Emilio Taviani , political leader, economist and historian Alberto Capozzi , actor Cesare Zoppetti , actor Lauro Gazzolo , actor Michele Malaspina , actor Vittorio Sanipoli , actor Enrico Gras , film director Claudio Gora , actor and film director Bartolomeo Pagano , actor, before his cinema career he worked at the port of Genoa Gilberto Govi , actor Eugenio Montale , poet, Nobel Prize Giorgio Caproni , poet, he moved to Genoa at a young age Enrico Accatino , painter sculptor, designer Giovan Battista Carpi , comics artist Giuseppe Taddei , Lyric baritone Lyda Borelli , theatre actress Pippo Barzizza , composer, arranger,conductor and music director Angelo Francesco Lavagnino , composer Natalino Otto , singer Lina Volonghi , film actress Eleonora Rossi Drago , film actress Rosanna Schiaffino , film actress Delia Boccardo , film actress Pietro Germi , film director Giuliano Montaldo , film director Riccardo Giacconi , astrophysics, Nobel Prize in Physics Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza , geneticist Andrea Gallo , presbyter Edoardo Sanguineti , poet Giancarlo De Carlo , architect Renzo Piano , architect Gianfranco Franchini , architect Lorenzo Mongiardino ,architect, interior designer Germano Celant , art historian Emanuele Luzzati , productor designer, illustrator Enzo Tortora , TV host on national RAI television Gian Piero Reverberi , composer, arranger, conductor Gian Franco Reverberi , composer, arranger Oscar Prudente , composer, arranger Umberto Bindi , singer-songwriter Gino Paoli , singer-songwriter, he moved to Genoa at a young age Luigi Tenco , singer-songwriter, he moved to Genoa at a young age Nino Ferrer , singer, songwriter, born in Genoa Vittorio Gassman , actor Carlo Mazzarella , actor and journalist Elisabetta Pozzi , film, television and stage actress Fernanda Pivano , writer, translator and critic Fabrizio de André , singer-songwriter Paolo Villaggio , actor Marcella Michelangeli , actress George Eastman (actor) Fabio Luisi , conductor New Trolls , progressive rock band Ivano Fossati , singer-songwriter Angelo Branduardi , he moved to Genoa at a young age Beppe Grillo , actor, political activist Moana Pozzi , pornographic actress, television personality Francesco Baccini , singer-songwriter Daniela Dessì , soprano Maurizio Crozza , actor, television presenter Beppe Gambetta , musician Dado Moroni , jazz pianist and composer Giovanni Ricciardi , cellist Franco Malerba , astronaut Vanessa Beecroft , contemporary artist, born in Genoa See also [ edit ] Italy portal List of tallest buildings in Genoa MT Haven Amoco Haven tanker disaster List of diplomats of Great Britain to the Republic of Genoa References [ edit ] ^ Population data from Istat ^ a b Urbanismi in Italia, 2011 ^ "Genoa: a bloody history, a beguiling present | Italy" . London: Times Online. 2004-04-25 . Retrieved 2009-04-11 . ^ ‘Genoa Economy’ , World66.com. ^ ‘Italy: Industry’ , Encyclopedia of the Nations, Advameg, Inc. ^ Macesich, George (2000). Issues in Money and Banking . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-275-96777-2 . ^ Alta Macadam, Northern Italy: From the Alps to Bologna , Blue Guides, 10th edn. (London: A. C. Black, 1997). ^ Selex ES: Company profile LinkedIn Corporation. ^ Ansaldo Energia: Company profile LinkedIn Corporation. ^ Giulia Petracco Sicardi, "Genova", in Dizionario di toponomastica , Torino, 1990, p. 355. Piera Melli ( Genova Preromana , 2007), based on an inscription on a pottery shard reading Kainua , suggests that the Latin name may be a corruption of an older Etruscan one with an original meaning of "new town". ^ Paul the Deacon, Historia Langobardorum, II.25 ^ Gregory I, Registrum Epistolarum, MGH Ep. 2, XI.14, p. 274 ^ Paul the Deacon, Historia Langobardorum, IV.45 ^ Steven A. Epstein, Genoa and the Genoese, 958-1528. (The University of North Carolina Press, 1996), p. 14 ^ Steven A. Epstein, Speaking of Slavery: Color, Ethnicity and Human Bondage in Italy (Conjunctions of Religion and Power in the Medieval Past ^ Before Columbus: Exploration and Colonization from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic, 1229–1492 ^ Early modern Italy (16th to 18th centuries) » The 17th century crisis Encyclopaedia Britannica. ^ Genoa 1684 , World History at KMLA. ^ "Italy officials convicted over G8" . BBC News. 2008-07-15 . Retrieved 2011-04-12 . ^ Perrin, British Flags , 1922, 22-25. ^ Aldo Ziggioto, "Genova", in Vexilla Italica 1, XX (1993); Aldo Ziggioto, "Le Bandiere degli Stati Italiani", in Armi Antiche 1994, cited after Pier Paolo Lugli, 18 July 2000 on Flags of the World . ^ transcription after the edition by Joaquín Rubio Tovar (2005). ^ a b c Tabelle climatiche 1971-2000 della stazione meteorologica di Genova-Sestri Ponente dall'Atlante Climatico 1971-2000 - Servizio Meteorologico dell'Aeronautica Militare ^ a b "Genoa Climate Guide" . ^ "La neve sulle coste del Mediterraneo" . ^ "Appunti di statistica meteorologica" . ^ "Visualizzazione tabella CLINO della stazione / CLINO Averages Listed for the station Genova (1961-1990)" . Archived from the original on October 8, 2006. ^ Roberto Pedemonte (May 2012). "La neve sulle coste del Maditerraneo (seconda parte)" . Rivista Ligure (in Italian). Genoa. 12 (44) . Retrieved 2014-06-28 . ^ "Testo del Regolamento sul sito del Comune di Genova" . Retrieved 2009-04-11 . ^ Fonte: Il Secolo XIX , 17 ottobre 2008, pag. 25 ^ "Tourism – Comune di Genova" . Turismo.comune.genova.it . Retrieved 2009-04-11 . ^ Abu-Lughod, J.L. (1991). Before European Hegemony: The World System A.D. 1250-1350 . Oxford University Press. p. 125. ISBN 9780195067743 . Retrieved 2014-12-03 . ^ Spruyt, H. (1996). The Sovereign State and Its Competitors: An Analysis of Systems Change . Princeton University Press. p. 132. ISBN 9780691029108 . Retrieved 2014-12-03 . ^ Scott, T. (2012). The City-State in Europe, 1000-1600: Hinterland, Territory, Region . OUP Oxford. p. 17. ISBN 9780199274604 . Retrieved 2014-12-03 . ^ "Global city GDP 2011" . Brookings Institution. ^ a b c "Eurostat" . Circa.europa.eu . Retrieved 2009-05-05 . ^ "Autorità Portuale di Genova – Traffico porto" . Porto.genova.it . Retrieved 2008-12-26 . ^ "Inf_07_05_Statistiche dei trasporti marittimi 2002-2004" (PDF) . Retrieved 2008-12-26 . ^ "Genoa Port Yearbook 2012" . Genoa Port Authority . Retrieved 19 November 2013 . ^ "AquaRing – home" (in Italian). Web.archive.org. 2007-10-12. Archived from the original on 2007-10-12 . Retrieved 2009-07-25 . ^ a b c "Art And Culture In And Around Genoa" . Premier.net . Retrieved 2011-04-12 . ^ "Pesto Genovese" . Mangiareinliguria.it . Retrieved 2011-04-12 . ^ a b "Article about Genoese Cuisine on the site http" . //www.portofinoworld.com. 2009-03-24 . Retrieved 2011-04-12 . External link in |publisher= ( help ) ^ "A brief history of the University of Genoa" . Orientamento.studenti.unige.it . Retrieved 2009-01-19 . ^ Facts and figures , University of Genoa ^ "The Italian Institute of Technology (IIT)" . Retrieved June 1, 2016 . [ dead link ] ^ Genoa Port Authority Archived December 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine . ^ "Autorità Portuale di Genova – Passeggeri" . Porto.genova.it . Retrieved 2008-12-26 . ^ "Costa Concordia makes final voyage to its scrapyard grave" . news.com.au . Retrieved 2014-12-03 . ^ "EAD Basic" . Ead.eurocontrol.int . Retrieved 2011-04-12 . ^ "Official traffic statistics from Assaeroporti" . Assaeroporti.it . Retrieved 2011-04-12 . ^ "Mobility Point and local press" . Mobilitypoint.it. 2007-08-22 . Retrieved 2009-04-11 . ^ "Al vostro servizio" [At your service] (in Italian). AMT Genova . Retrieved 2015-05-26 . ^ "Azienda Mobilità e Trasporti Spa" . Amt.genova.it . Retrieved 2011-04-12 . ^ "SII – Sustainability Innovation Inventory" (PDF) . Retrieved 2011-04-12 . ^ "drt bus video preview" . Drtbus.co.uk . Retrieved 2011-04-12 . ^ a b "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on October 28, 2013 . Retrieved November 11, 2013 . , Comune di Genova - International [ dead link ] ^ "Twin-cities of Azerbaijan" . Azerbaijans.com . Retrieved 2013-08-09 . Bibliography [ edit ] Gino Benvenuti. Le repubbliche marinare. Amalfi, Pisa, Genova e Venezia . Netwon Compton, Rome, 1989. Steven A. Epstein; Genoa the Genoese, 958–1528 University of North Carolina Press , 1996; online edition Steven A. Epstein; "Labour and Port Life in Medieval Genoa." Mediterranean Historical Review . 3 (1988): 114–40. Steven A. Epstein; "Business Cycles and the Sense of Time in Medieval Genoa." Business History Review 62 (1988): 238–60. Face Richard. "Secular History in Twelfth-Century Italy: Caffaro of Genoa." Journal of Medieval History 6 (1980): 169–84. Hughes Diane Owen. "Kinsmen and Neighbors in Medieval Genoa." In The Medieval City, edited by Harry A. Miskimin, David Herlihy, and Adam L. Udovitch, 1977, 3–28. Hughes Diane Owen. "Urban Growth and Family Structure in Medieval Genoa." Past and Present 66 (1975): 3–28. Lopez Robert S. "Genoa." In Dictionary of the Middle Ages, pp. 383–87. 1982. Vitale Vito. Breviario della storia di Genova. Vols. 1–2. Genoa, 1955. Giuseppe Felloni – Guido Laura " Genova e la storia della finanza: una serie di primati ?" "Genoa and the history of finance: a series of firsts ?" 9 November 2004, ISBN 88-87822-16-6 (www.giuseppefelloni.it) Van Doosselaere, Quentin, Commercial Agreements and Social Dynamics in Medieval Genoa (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009). External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Genoa . Staglieno: A monumental cemetery Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Genoa . Official Site Genova2015.org - Official Site v t e Comuni of the Metropolitan City of Genoa Arenzano Avegno Bargagli Bogliasco Borzonasca Busalla Camogli Campo Ligure Campomorone Carasco Casarza Ligure Casella Castiglione Chiavarese Ceranesi Chiavari Cicagna Cogoleto Cogorno Coreglia Ligure Crocefieschi Davagna Fascia Favale di Malvaro Fontanigorda Genoa Gorreto Isola del Cantone Lavagna Leivi Lorsica Lumarzo Masone Mele Mezzanego Mignanego Mocònesi Moneglia Montebruno Montoggio Ne Neirone Orero Pieve Ligure Portofino Propata Rapallo Recco Rezzoaglio Ronco Scrivia Rondanina Rossiglione Rovegno San Colombano Certénoli Sant'Olcese Santa Margherita Ligure Santo Stefano d'Aveto Savignone Serra Riccò Sestri Levante Sori Tiglieto Torriglia Tribogna Uscio Valbrevenna Vobbia Zoagli v t e Regional capitals of Italy 

L'Aquila , Abruzzo 

Aosta , Aosta Valley 

Bari , Apulia 

Potenza , Basilicata 

Catanzaro , Calabria 

Naples , Campania 

Bologna , Emilia-Romagna 

Trieste , Friuli-Venezia Giulia 

Rome , Lazio 

Genoa , Liguria 

Milan , Lombardy 

Ancona , Marche 

Campobasso , Molise 

Turin , Piedmont 

Cagliari , Sardinia 

Palermo , Sicily 

Trento , Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol 

Florence , Tuscany 

Perugia , Umbria 

Venice , Veneto v t e European Capitals of Culture 1985 Athens 1986 Florence 1987 Amsterdam 1988 West Berlin 1989 Paris 1990 Glasgow 1991 Dublin 1992 Madrid 1993 Antwerp 1994 Lisbon 1995 Luxembourg City 1996 Copenhagen 1997 Thessaloniki 1998 Stockholm 1999 Weimar 2000 Reykjavík Bergen Helsinki Brussels Prague Kraków Santiago de Compostela Avignon Bologna 2001 Rotterdam Porto 2002 Bruges Salamanca 2003 Graz Plovdiv 2004 Genoa Lille 2005 Cork 2006 Patras 2007 Luxembourg City and Greater Region Sibiu 2008 Liverpool Stavanger 2009 Linz Vilnius 2010 Ruhr Istanbul Pécs 2011 Turku Tallinn 2012 Maribor Guimarães 2013 Košice Marseille 2014 Umeå Riga 2015 Mons Plzeň 2016 San Sebastián Wrocław 2017 Aarhus Paphos 2018 Valletta Leeuwarden 2019 Plovdiv Matera 2020 Rijeka Galway v t e World Heritage Sites in Italy Northwest Crespi d'Adda Genoa Mantua and Sabbioneta Monte San Giorgio 1 Porto Venere , Palmaria , Tino and Tinetto , Cinque Terre Corniglia Manarola Monterosso al Mare Riomaggiore Vernazza Residences of the Royal House of Savoy Castle of Moncalieri Castle of Racconigi Castle of Rivoli Castello del Valentino Royal Palace of Turin Palazzo Carignano Palazzo Madama, Turin Palace of Venaria Palazzina di caccia of Stupinigi Villa della Regina Rhaetian Railway in the Albula / Bernina Landscapes 1 Rock Drawings in Valcamonica Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan Vineyard Landscape of Piedmont : Langhe - Roero and Monferrato 









Northeast Aquileia The Dolomites Ferrara Modena Cathedral , Torre della Ghirlandina and Piazza Grande, Modena Orto botanico di Padova Ravenna Venice Verona City of Vicenza and the Palladian Villas of the Veneto Central Assisi Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi Etruscan Necropolises of Cerveteri and Tarquinia Florence Hadrian's Villa Medici villas Piazza del Duomo, Pisa Pienza Rome 2 San Gimignano Siena Urbino Val d'Orcia Villa d'Este South Alberobello Amalfi Coast Castel del Monte, Apulia Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park , Paestum and Velia , Certosa di Padula Herculaneum Oplontisand Villa Poppaea Naples Palace of Caserta , Aqueduct of Vanvitelli and San Leucio Complex Pompeii Sassi of Matera Islands Aeolian Islands Arab-Norman Palermo and the Cathedral Churches of Cefalù and Monreale Archaeological Area of Agrigento Barumini nuraghes Mount Etna Syracuse and Necropolis of Pantalica Val di Noto Caltagirone Catania Militello in Val di Catania Modica Noto Palazzolo Acreide Ragusa Scicli Villa Romana del Casale Nationwide Longobards in Italy, Places of Power (568–774 A.D.) Brescia Cividale del Friuli Castelseprio Spoleto Temple of Clitumnus located at Campello sul Clitunno Santa Sofia located at Benevento Sanctuary of Monte Sant'Angelo located at Monte Sant'Angelo Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps 3 1 Shared with Switzerland 2 Shared with the Holy See 3 Shared with Austria , France , Germany , Slovenia , and Switzerland v t e Maritime republics Amalfi Ancona Gaeta Genoa Noli Pisa Ragusa Venice v t e Cities in Italy by population 1,000,000+ Milan Rome 500,000+ Genoa Naples Palermo Turin 200,000+ Bari Bologna Catania Florence Messina Padua Taranto Trieste Venice Verona 100,000+ Ancona Andria Arezzo Bergamo Bolzano Brescia Cagliari Ferrara Foggia Forlì Giugliano Latina Livorno Modena Monza Novara Parma Perugia Pescara Piacenza Prato Ravenna Reggio Calabria Reggio Emilia Rimini Salerno Sassari Syracuse Terni Trento Udine Vicenza complete list Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF : 260885455 GND : 4020185-5 NDL : 00846773 NKC : ge128948 (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.log.warn("Gadget \"teahouse\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"ReferenceTooltips\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"featured-articles-links\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");}); Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genoa oldid=745542416 " Categories : Cities and towns in Liguria Communes of the Province of Genoa Genoa Italian Riviera Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy Roman towns and cities in Italy Capitals of former nations World Heritage Sites in Italy Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 errors: external links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2016 Articles with Wayback Machine links Articles with dead external links from April 2016 Articles containing Italian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012 Pages using weather box with unknown parameters Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Bân-lâm-gú Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Коми Кыргызча Ladino Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Lumbaart Magyar मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русский संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Twi Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 21 October 2016, at 19:02. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.loader.load(["ext.cite.a11y","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.action.view.postEdit","site","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.searchSuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.ReferenceTooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.DRN-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.refToolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.visualEditor.targetLoader","ext.eventLogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaEvents","ext.navigationTiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.centralNotice.geoIP","ext.centralNotice.startUp"]);}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set( { "wgPageParseReport": { "limitreport": { "cputime": "1.148", "walltime": "1.684", "ppvisitednodes": { "value": 13677, "limit": 1000000 }, "ppgeneratednodes": { "value": 0, "limit": 1500000 }, "postexpandincludesize": { "value": 242668, "limit": 2097152 }, "templateargumentsize": { "value": 19413, "limit": 2097152 }, "expansiondepth": { "value": 26, "limit": 40 }, "expensivefunctioncount": { "value": 12, "limit": 500 }, "entityaccesscount": { "value": 1, "limit": 400 }, "timingprofile": [ "100.00% 1055.112 1 -total", " 21.83% 230.303 1 Template:Infobox_Italian_comune", " 20.01% 211.175 1 Template:Infobox_settlement", " 19.82% 209.143 3 Template:Infobox", " 19.33% 203.936 1 Template:Reflist", " 10.24% 108.034 49 Template:Flagicon", " 8.35% 88.117 1 Template:Province_of_Genoa", " 7.94% 83.735 28 Template:Cite_web", " 5.46% 57.579 27 Template:Convert", " 4.80% 50.611 1 Template:Weather_box" ] }, "scribunto": { "limitreport-timeusage": { "value": "0.338", "limit": "10.000" }, "limitreport-memusage": { "value": 12019819, "limit": 52428800 } }, "cachereport": { "origin": "mw1301", "timestamp": "20161021190303", "ttl": 2592000, "transientcontent": false } } } );}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgBackendResponseTime":93,"wgHostname":"mw1186"});});