Maldives - Wikipedia document.documentElement.className = document.documentElement.className.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" ); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgCanonicalNamespace":"","wgCanonicalSpecialPageName":false,"wgNamespaceNumber":0,"wgPageName":"Maldives","wgTitle":"Maldives","wgCurRevisionId":745288171,"wgRevisionId":745288171,"wgArticleId":19117,"wgIsArticle":true,"wgIsRedirect":false,"wgAction":"view","wgUserName":null,"wgUserGroups":["*"],"wgCategories":["CS1 errors: dates","All articles with dead external links","Articles with dead external links from June 2016","Use British English from February 2012","Use dmy dates from May 2016","Articles containing Dhivehi-language text","Articles including recorded pronunciations","All articles with unsourced statements","Articles with unsourced statements from October 2009","Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016","All articles lacking reliable references","Articles lacking reliable references from April 2013","All articles with links needing disambiguation","Articles with links needing disambiguation from September 2016","Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008","All articles containing potentially dated statements","Articles needing additional references from October 2016","All articles needing additional references","Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007","Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010","Articles needing additional references from April 2012","Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013","Articles needing additional references from October 2011","Articles with unsourced statements from November 2014","Articles with DMOZ links","Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers","Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers","Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers","Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers","Coordinates on Wikidata","Maldives","Archipelagoes of the Indian Ocean","Countries in Asia","Island countries","Islands of the Indian Ocean","Landforms of South Asia","Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation","Member states of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation","Member states of the United Nations","Muslim-majority countries","Republics","Small Island Developing States","South Asian countries","States and territories established in 1965","1965 establishments in Asia"],"wgBreakFrames":false,"wgPageContentLanguage":"en","wgPageContentModel":"wikitext","wgSeparatorTransformTable":["",""],"wgDigitTransformTable":["",""],"wgDefaultDateFormat":"dmy","wgMonthNames":["","January","February","March","April","May","June","July","August","September","October","November","December"],"wgMonthNamesShort":["","Jan","Feb","Mar","Apr","May","Jun","Jul","Aug","Sep","Oct","Nov","Dec"],"wgRelevantPageName":"Maldives","wgRelevantArticleId":19117,"wgRequestId":"WAo0owpAMEgAAFIBcxoAAABH","wgIsProbablyEditable":true,"wgRestrictionEdit":[],"wgRestrictionMove":["sysop"],"wgWikiEditorEnabledModules":{"toolbar":true,"dialogs":true,"preview":false,"publish":false},"wgBetaFeaturesFeatures":[],"wgMediaViewerOnClick":true,"wgMediaViewerEnabledByDefault":true,"wgVisualEditor":{"pageLanguageCode":"en","pageLanguageDir":"ltr","usePageImages":true,"usePageDescriptions":true},"wgPreferredVariant":"en","wgMFDisplayWikibaseDescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgRelatedArticles":null,"wgRelatedArticlesUseCirrusSearch":true,"wgRelatedArticlesOnlyUseCirrusSearch":false,"wgULSCurrentAutonym":"English","wgNoticeProject":"wikipedia","wgCentralNoticeCookiesToDelete":[],"wgCentralNoticeCategoriesUsingLegacy":["Fundraising","fundraising"],"wgCategoryTreePageCategoryOptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgFlaggedRevsParams":{"tags":{"status":{"levels":1,"quality":2,"pristine":3}}},"wgStableRevisionId":null,"wgCoordinates":{"lat":3.2,"lon":73.22},"wgWikibaseItemId":"Q826","wgCentralAuthMobileDomain":false,"wgVisualEditorToolbarScrollOffset":0,"wgEditSubmitButtonLabelPublish":false});mw.loader.state({"ext.globalCssJs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","user.cssprefs":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"loading","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","ext.tmh.thumbnail.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediaBadges":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonPrint":"ready","mediawiki.sectionAnchor":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.user":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.options@0j3lz3q",function($,jQuery,require,module){mw.user.options.set({"variant":"en"});});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@1dqfd7l",function ( $, jQuery, require, module ) { mw.user.tokens.set({"editToken":"+\\","patrolToken":"+\\","watchToken":"+\\","csrfToken":"+\\"});/*@nomin*/; });mw.loader.load(["mw.MediaWikiPlayer.loader","mw.PopUpMediaTransform","mw.TMHGalleryHook.js","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.legacy.wikibits","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.init","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","skins.vector.js"]);}); Maldives From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation , search Republic of Maldives 

ދިވެހިރާއްޖޭގެ ޖުމްހޫރިއްޔާ Dhivehi Raa'jeyge Jumhooriyya Flag Emblem Anthem: Qaumii salaam 

National Salute 

Location of Maldives in the Indian Ocean. Capital 

and largest city Malé 

4°10′N 73°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 4.167°N 73.500°E ﻿ / 4.167; 73.500 Official languages Maldivian (Dhivehi) Ethnic groups (2011) ≈100% Maldivians a [1] [2] [3] Religion Sunni Islam Demonym Maldivian Government Unitary presidential constitutional republic • President Abdulla Yameen • Vice President Abdulla Jihad [4] • Speaker Abdulla Maseeh Mohamed [5] • Chief Justice Abdullah Saeed [6] Legislature People's Majlis Independence • from the United Kingdom 26 July 1965 • Current constitution 7 August 2008 Area • Total 298 [7] km 2 ( 206th ) 

115 sq mi • Water (%) 0 Population • July 2015 estimate 393,253 [8] ( 175th ) • 2014 census 341,356 [9] • Density 1,102.5/km 2 ( 11th ) 

2,855.4/sq mi GDP ( PPP ) 2016 estimate • Total $4.935 billion [10] ( 162nd ) • Per capita $13,954 [10] ( 69th ) GDP (nominal) 2016 estimate • Total $3.228 billion [10] • Per capita $9,126 [10] Gini (2005–2013) 37.4 [11] 

medium HDI (2014) 0.706 [12] 

high · 103rd Currency Maldivian rufiyaa ( MVR ) Time zone Maldives Time ( UTC +5) Date format dd/mm/yy Drives on the left Calling code +960 ISO 3166 code MV Internet TLD .mv a. Excluding foreign nationals. 

The Maldives ( / ˈ m ɒ l d iː v z / , / ˈ m ɔː l d iː v z / , i / ˈ m ɔː l d aɪ v z / or / ˈ m æ l d aɪ v z / ), [13] officially the Republic of Maldives ( Maldivian : ދިވެހިރާއްޖޭގެ ޖުމްހޫރިއްޔާ , Dhivehi Raa'jeyge Jumhooriyya ), is a South Asian island country , located in the Indian Ocean . It lies southwest of India and Sri Lanka . The chain of twenty six atolls stretches from Ihavandhippolhu Atoll in the north to the Addu City in the south. Comprising a territory spanning roughly 90,000 square kilometres (35,000 sq mi), the Maldives is one of the world's most geographically dispersed countries, as well as the smallest Asian country by both land area and population, with a little over 393,500 inhabitants. Malé is the capital and most populated city, traditionally called the " King's Island " for its central location. 

The Maldives archipelago is located atop the Chagos-Maldives-Laccadive Ridge , a vast submarine mountain range in the Indian Ocean, which also forms a terrestrial ecoregion , together with the Chagos and the Lakshadweep. [14] With an average ground-level elevation of 1.5 metres (4 ft 11 in) above sea level, [15] it is the world's lowest country, with even its highest natural point being the lowest in the world, at 2.4 metres (7 ft 10 in). [15] Due to the subsequent risks posed by rising sea-levels , the government has pledged to make the Maldives a carbon-neutral country by 2019. [16] 

The Maldives have been historically and culturally linked to the Indian subcontinent since the fourth century BCE. The Maldivian archipelago was Islamised in the 12th century and consolidated as a sultanate , developing strong commercial and cultural ties with Asia and Africa. From the mid 16th-century, the region came under the increasing influence of colonial powers , with the Maldives becoming a British protectorate in 1887. Independence from the United Kingdom was achieved in 1965 and a presidential republic was established in 1968 with an elected People's Majlis . The ensuing decades have been characterised by political instability, efforts at democratic reform, [17] and environmental challenges posed by climate change . 

The Maldives is a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). It is also a member of the United Nations , the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Non Aligned Movement . The World Bank classifies the Maldives as having an upper middle income economy. [18] Fishing has historically been the dominant economic activity, and remains the largest sector by far, followed by the rapidly growing tourism industry. Along with Sri Lanka, it is one of only two South Asian countries rated "high" on the Human Development Index (HDI), [19] with its per capita income the highest among SAARC nations. 

The Maldives was a Commonwealth republic from July 1982 until its withdrawal from the Commonwealth in October 2016 in protest at international criticism of its records in relation to corruption and human rights. 

Contents 1 Toponymy 2 History 2.1 Ancient history and settlement 2.2 Buddhist period 2.3 Islamic Period 2.4 British protectorate, 1887–1965 2.5 Independence and Republic 2.6 21st century 3 Geography 3.1 Protected areas of Maldives 3.2 Climate 3.3 Environmental issues 3.4 Marine ecosystem 4 Government 4.1 Law 4.2 Human rights 4.3 Foreign relations 4.4 Military 4.5 Administrative divisions 5 Economy 5.1 Tourism 5.2 Fishing industry 6 Demographics 6.1 Religion 6.2 Languages 6.3 Population by locality 7 Culture 8 Transportation 9 Education 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links 

Toponymy [ edit ] See also: Names of Maldives 

The name Maldives may derive from the Malayalam words "maala" (garland) and "dweepu" (island) or the Tamil maalai (garland / evening) and theevu (island), [20] or මාල දිවයින Maala Divaina ("Necklace Islands") in Sinhala . [21] The Maldivian people are called Dhivehin . The word Theevu (archaic Dheevu , related to Tamil தீவு dheevu ) means "island", and Dhives ( Dhivehin ) means "islanders" (i.e., Maldivians). [ citation needed ] 

The ancient Sri Lankan chronicle Mahawamsa refers to an island called Mahiladiva ("Island of Women", महिलादिभ) in Pali , which is probably a mistranslation of the same Sanskrit word meaning " garland ". 

Jan S Hogendorn, Grossman Professor of Economics, theorises that the name Maldives derives from the Sanskrit mālādvīpa ( मालाद्वीप ), meaning "garland of islands". [20] In Tamil, "Garland of Islands" can be translated as MalaiTheevu ( மாலைத்தீவு ). [22] In Malayalam, "Garland of Islands" can be translated as Maladweepu ( മാലദ്വീപ് ). In Kannada, "Garland of Islands" can be translated as Maaledweepa ( ಮಾಲೆದ್ವೀಪ ). None of these names is mentioned in any literature, but classical Sanskrit texts dating back to the Vedic period mention the "Hundred Thousand Islands" ( Lakshadweepa ), a generic name which would include not only the Maldives, but also the Laccadives , Aminidivi Islands, Minicoy and the Chagos island groups. [23] 

Some medieval travellers such as Ibn Batuta called the islands Mahal Dibiyat ( محل دبيأت ) from the Arabic word Mahal ("palace"), which must be how the Berber traveller interpreted the local name, having been through Muslim North India, where Perso-Arabic words were introduced to the local vocabulary. [24] This is the name currently inscribed on the scroll in the Maldive state emblem . The classical Persian/Arabic name for Maldives is Dibajat . [25] [26] The Dutch referred to the islands as the "Maldivische Eilanden" ( pronounced [mɑlˈdivisə ˈɛi̯lɑndə(n)] ), while the British anglicised the local name for the islands first to the "Maldive Islands" and later to "Maldives." History [ edit ] Main article: History of the Maldives Ancient history and settlement [ edit ] 

Comparative studies of Maldivian oral, linguistic and cultural traditions and customs indicate that early settlers were Dravidian people [27] from ancient Tamilakam in the Sangam period (300 BC–AD 300), most probably fishermen from the southwest coasts of what is now the south of the Indian Subcontinent and the western shores of Sri Lanka . One such community is the Giraavaru people descended from ancient Tamils . They are mentioned in ancient legends and local folklore about the establishment of the capital and kingly rule in Malé . 

A strong underlying layer of Dravidian population and culture survives in Maldivian society, with a clear Dravidian-Malayalam substratum in the language, which also appears in place names, kinship terms, poetry, dance, and religious beliefs. Malabari seafaring culture led to Malayali settling of the Laccadives , and the Maldives were evidently viewed as an extension of that archipelago. Some argue (from the presence of Jat, Gujjar Titles and Gotra names) that Sindhis also accounted for an early layer of migration. Seafaring from Debal began during the Indus valley civilisation . The Jatakas and Puranas show abundant evidence of this maritime trade; the use of similar traditional boat building techniques in Northwestern South Asia and the Maldives, and the presence of silver punch mark coins from both regions, gives additional weight to this. There are minor signs of Southeast Asian settlers, probably some adrift from the main group of Austronesian reed boat migrants that settled Madagascar . [2] 

The earliest written history of the Maldives is marked by the arrival of Sinhalese people, who were descended from the exiled Magadha Prince Vijaya from the ancient city known as Sinhapura . He and his party of several hundred landed in Sri Lanka, and some in the Maldives circa 543 to 483 BC. According to the Mahavansa , one of the ships that sailed with Prince Vijaya, who went to Sri Lanka around 500 BC, went adrift and arrived at an island called Mahiladvipika , which is being identified with the Maldives. It is also said that at that time, the people from Mahiladvipika used to travel to Sri Lanka. Their settlement in Sri Lanka and the Maldives marks a significant change in demographics and the development of the Indo-Aryan language Dhivehi , which is most similar in grammar, phonology, and structure to Sinhala , and especially to the more ancient Elu Prakrit , which has less Pali . [ citation needed ] 

Alternatively, it is believed that Vijaya and his clan came from western India – a claim supported by linguistic and cultural features, and specific descriptions in the epics themselves, e.g. that Vijaya visited Bharukaccha ( Bharuch in Gujarat) in his ship on the voyage down south. [2] 

Philostorgius , a Greek historian of Late Antiquity, wrote of a hostage among the Romans, from the island called Diva , which is presumed to be the Maldives, who was baptised Theophilus. Theophilus was sent in the 350s to convert the Himyarites to Christianity, and went to his homeland from Arabia ; he returned to Arabia, visited Axum , and settled in Antioch . [28] Buddhist period [ edit ] The Buddhist Stupa (the best preserved, the largest and the last of the Buddhist temples that were destroyed) at Kuruhinna in Gan Island (Haddhunmathi Atoll) . 

Buddhism came to the Maldives at the time of Emperor Ashoka 's expansion, and became the dominant religion of the people of the Maldives until the 12th century AD. The ancient Maldivian Kings promoted Buddhism , and the first Maldive writings and artistic achievements, in the form of highly developed sculpture and architecture, are from that period. Before embracing Buddhism as their way of life, Maldivians had practised an ancient form of Hinduism , ritualistic traditions known as Śrauta , in the form of venerating the Surya (the ancient ruling caste were of Aadheetta or Suryavanshi origins). 

The first archaeological study of the remains of early cultures in the Maldives began with the work of H.C.P. Bell , a British commissioner of the Ceylon Civil Service . Bell was first ordered to the islands in late 1879 [29] he returned twice to the Maldives to investigate ancient ruins. He studied the ancient mounds, called havitta or ustubu (these names are derived from chaitiya and stupa ) ( Maldivian : ހަވިއްތަ ) by the Maldivians, which are found on many of the atolls. Although Bell asserted that the ancient Maldivians had followed Theravada Buddhism , many local Buddhist archaeological remains now in the Malé Museum in fact also display elements of Mahayana and Vajrayana iconography. Isdhoo Lōmāfānu is the oldest copper-plate book to have been discovered in the Maldives to date. The book was written in AD 1194 (590 AH) in the Evēla form of the Divehi akuru , during the reign of Siri Fennaadheettha Mahaa Radun (Dhinei Kalaminja) . 

In the early 11th century, the Minicoy and Thiladhunmathi, and possibly other northern Atolls, were conquered by the medieval Chola Tamil emperor Raja Raja Chola I , thus becoming a part of the Chola Empire . 

According to a legend from Maldivian folklore , in the early 12th century AD, a medieval prince named Koimala , a nobleman of the Lion Race from Sri Lanka, sailed to Rasgetheemu island (literally "Town of the Royal House", or figuratively "King's Town") in the North Maalhosmadulu Atoll, and from there to Malé, and established a kingdom. [ citation needed ] By then, the Aadeetta (Sun) Dynasty (the Suryavanshi ruling cast) had for some time ceased to rule in Malé, possibly because of invasions by the Cholas of Southern India in the 10th century. Koimala Kalou (Lord Koimala), who reigned as King Maanaabarana, was a king of the Homa (Lunar) Dynasty (the Chandravanshi ruling cast), which some historians call the House of Theemuge . [30] 

The Homa (Lunar) dynasty sovereigns intermarried with the Aaditta (Sun) Dynasty. This is why the formal titles of Maldive kings until 1968 contained references to " kula sudha ira ", which means "descended from the Moon and the Sun". No official record exists of the Aadeetta dynasty's reign. Since Koimala's reign, the Maldive throne was also known as the Singaasana (Lion Throne). [30] Before then, and in some situations since, it was also known as the Saridhaaleys (Ivory Throne). [31] Some historians credit Koimala with freeing the Maldives from Chola rule. 

Several foreign travellers, mainly Arabs, had written about a kingdom of the Maldives ruled over by a queen. This kingdom pre-dated Koimala's reign. al-Idrisi , referring to earlier writers, mentions the name of one of the queens, Damahaar, who was a member of the Aadeetta (Sun) dynasty. Islamic Period [ edit ] A Plaque in Juma Mosque, Malé, Maldives, on which Yusuf Tabrizi 's name is written. Yusuf Tabrizi was a Persian who is said to have converted Maldives in 12th century AD to Islam . 

The conversion to Islam is mentioned in the edicts written in copper plates from the end of the 12th century AD. 

The famous Moroccan traveller Ibn Batutta , who visited the Maldives in the 14th century, wrote how a Moroccan, one Abu Barakat the Berber , was believed to have been responsible for spreading Islam in the islands. Even though this report has been contested in later sources, it does explain some crucial aspects of Maldivian culture. For instance, historically Arabic has been the prime language of administration there, instead of the Persian and Urdu languages used in the nearby Muslim states. Another link to North Africa was the Maliki school of jurisprudence, used throughout most of North Africa, which was the official one in the Maldives until the 17th century. [32] 

Some scholars have suggested the possibility of Ibn Battuta misreading Maldive texts, and have posited another scenario where this Abu Barakat might have been a native of Berbera , a significant trading port on the north western coast of Somalia . [33] This scenario would also help explain the usage of the Arabic language and the predominance of the Maliki school on the islands. 

Another interpretation, held by some of the islanders, is that Abu Barakat was an Iranian from Tabriz. In the Arabic script the words al-Barbari and al-Tabrizi are very much alike, owing to the fact that at the time, Arabic had several consonants that looked identical and could only be differentiated by overall context (this has since changed by addition of dots above or below letters to clarify pronunciation – For example, the letter "B" in modern Arabic has a dot below, whereas the letter "T" looks identical except there are two dots above it). The first reference to an Iranian origin dates to an 18th-century Persian text. [34] 

The Maldives was the first landfall for traders from Basra , sailing to Sri Lanka or Southeast Asia. Bengal was one of the principal trading partners of the Maldives. Shell currency imported from the Maldives was used as legal tender in the Bengal Sultanate and Mughal Bengal , alongside gold and silver. The Maldives received rice in exchange for cowry shells. The Bengal-Maldives cowry shell trade was the largest shell currency trade network in history. [35] In the Maldives, ships could take on fresh water, fruit and the delicious, basket-smoked red flesh of the black bonito , a delicacy exported to Sindh , China and Yemen . The people of the archipelago were described as gentle, civilised and hospitable. They produced brass utensils as well as fine cotton textiles, exported in the form of sarongs and turban lengths. These local industries must have depended on imported raw materials. 

The other essential product of the Maldives was coir , the fibre of the dried coconut husk . Cured in pits, beaten, spun and then twisted into cordage and ropes , coir's salient quality is its resistance to saltwater. It stitched together and rigged the dhows that plied the Indian Ocean. Maldivian coir was exported to Sindh, China , Yemen , and the Persian Gulf . 

"It is stronger than hemp ", wrote Ibn Battuta , "and is used to sew together the planks of Sindhi and Yemeni dhows, for this sea abounds in reefs, and if the planks were fastened with iron nails, they would break into pieces when the vessel hit a rock. The coir gives the boat greater elasticity, so that it doesn't break up." British protectorate, 1887–1965 [ edit ] An RAF Short Sunderland moored in the lagoon at Addu Atoll, during WWII 

On 16 December 1887, the Sultan of the Maldives signed a contract with the British Governor of Ceylon turning the Maldives into a British protected state , thus giving up the islands' sovereignty in matters of foreign policy , but retaining internal self-government. The British government promised military protection and non-interference in local administration in exchange for an annual tribute . The status of the islands were akin to other British protectorates in the Indian Ocean region, including Zanzibar and the Trucial States . 

In 1957, the British established an air base, RAF Gan , in the strategic southernmost atoll of Addu , paying £2000 a year, employing hundreds of locals. This served as a staging post for British military flights to the Far East and Australia, replacing RAF Mauripur in Pakistan which had been relinquished in 1956. The base was closed in 1976 as part of the larger British withdrawal of permanently stationed forces ' East of Suez ' initiated by Labour government of Harold Wilson . [36] 

In 1953, there was an abortive attempt to form a republic, but the sultanate survived. In 1959, objecting to Ibrahim Nasir 's centralism, the inhabitants of the three southernmost atolls protested against the government. They formed the United Suvadive Republic and elected Abdullah Afeef as president and chose Hithadhoo as capital of this republic. Independence and Republic [ edit ] Abdul Majeed Didi , Sultan of the Maldives (1945-1952). 

In line with the broader British policy of decolonisation on 26 July 1965 an agreement was signed on behalf of His Majesty the Sultan by Ibrahim Nasir Rannabandeyri Kilegefan, Prime Minister, and on behalf of Her Majesty The Queen by Sir Michael Walker, British Ambassador designate to the Maldive Islands, which ended the British responsibility for the defence and external affairs of the Maldives. The islands thus achieved full political independence, with the ceremony taking place at the British High Commissioner's Residence in Colombo. After this, the sultanate continued for another three years under Muhammad Fareed Didi , who declared himself King rather than Sultan. 

On 15 November 1967, a vote was taken in parliament to decide whether the Maldives should continue as a constitutional monarchy or become a republic. Of the 44 members of parliament, forty voted in favour of a republic. On 15 March 1968, a national referendum was held on the question, and 93.34% of those taking part voted in favour of establishing a republic. The republic was declared on 11 November 1968, thus ending the 853-year-old monarchy, which was replaced by a republic under the presidency of Ibrahim Nasir . As the King had held little real power, this was seen as a cosmetic change and required few alterations in the structures of government. Mamoon Abdul Gayoom , President of the Maldives (1978–2008). 

Tourism began to be developed on the archipelago by the beginning of the 1970s. The first resort in the Maldives was Kurumba Maldives which welcomed the first guests on 3 October 1972. The first accurate census was held in December 1977 and showed 142,832 persons residing in Maldives. [37] Political infighting during the '70s between Nasir's faction and other political figures led to the 1975 arrest and exile of elected prime minister Ahmed Zaki to a remote atoll . Economic decline followed the closure of the British airfield at Gan and the collapse of the market for dried fish, an important export. With support for his administration faltering, Nasir fled to Singapore in 1978, with millions of dollars from the treasury. 

Maumoon Abdul Gayoom began his 30-year role as President in 1978, winning six consecutive elections without opposition. His election was seen as ushering in a period of political stability and economic development in view of Gayoom's priority to develop the poorer islands. Tourism flourished and increased foreign contact spurred development. However, Gayoom's rule was controversial, with some critics saying Gayoom was an autocrat who quelled dissent by limiting freedoms and political favouritism. [38] 

A series of coup attempts (in 1980, 1983, and 1988) by Nasir supporters and business interests tried to topple the government without success. While the first two attempts met with little success, the 1988 coup attempt involved a roughly 80-person mercenary force of the PLOTE Tamil militant group who seized the airport and caused Gayoom to flee from house to house until the intervention of 1600 Indian troops airlifted into Malé restored order. 

A November 1988 coup was headed by Muhammadu Ibrahim Lutfee, a small-businessman. On the night of 3 November 1988, the Indian Air Force airlifted a parachute battalion group from Agra and flew them over 2,000 kilometres (1,200 mi) to the Maldives. The Indian paratroopers landed at Hulule and secured the airfield and restored the government rule at Malé within hours. The brief, bloodless operation, labelled Operation Cactus , also involved the Indian Navy . 21st century [ edit ] People in Malé removing sand bags from a nearby construction site, to be used as a barrier to protect their homes from the flood, shortly after being hit by the tsunami generated by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake . 

On 26 December 2004, following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake , the Maldives were devastated by a tsunami. Only nine islands were reported to have escaped any flooding, [39] [40] while fifty-seven islands faced serious damage to critical infrastructure, fourteen islands had to be totally evacuated, and six islands were destroyed. A further twenty-one resort islands were forced to close because of serious damage. The total damage was estimated at more than US$400 million, or some 62% of the GDP. [41] [42] 102 Maldivians and 6 foreigners reportedly died in the tsunami. [38] The destructive impact of the waves on the low-lying islands was mitigated by the fact there was no continental shelf or land mass upon which the waves could gain height. The tallest waves were reported to be 14 feet (4.3 m) high. [43] 

During the later part of Gayoom's rule, independent political movements emerged in Maldives, which challenged the then-ruling Dhivehi Rayyithunge Party (Maldivian People's Party) and demanded democratic reform. 

The dissident journalist Mohamed Nasheed rose to challenge the autocratic rule of Gayoom. Nasheed was imprisoned a total of 16 times under Gayoom’s rule. Persisting in his activism, he founded the Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) in 2003 while in exile. His activism, as well as civil unrest that year, pressured Gayoom into allowing for gradual political reforms. [44] 

These movements brought about significant change in political structure. In 2008 a new constitution was approved and the first direct presidential elections occurred, which were won by Mohamed Nasheed and Mohammed Waheed Hassan (as Vice-President) in the second round. The 2009 parliamentary election saw the Maldivian Democratic Party of President Nasheed receive the most votes with 30.81%, gaining 26 seats, although the Dhivehi Rayyithunge Party, with 24.62% of the vote, received the most seats (28). 

The government of President Mohamed Nasheed faced many challenges, including the huge debts left by the previous government, the economic downturn following the 2004 tsunami, overspending (by means of overprinting of local currency rufiyaa) during his regime, unemployment, corruption, and increasing drug use. [45] [ unreliable source? ] The ousted democratically elected president Mohamed Nasheed . 

Taxation on goods was imposed for the first time in the country, and import duties were reduced in many goods and services. Social welfare benefits were given to those above 65 years of age, single parents, and those with special needs. On 10 November 2008, Nasheed announced an intent to create a sovereign wealth fund with money earned from tourism that could be used to purchase land elsewhere for the Maldives people to relocate should rising sea levels due to climate change inundate the country. The government reportedly considered locations in Sri Lanka and India due to cultural and climate similarities, and as far away as Australia. [38] 

On 23 December 2011, the opposition held a mass symposium with as many as 20,000 people in the name of protecting Islam, which they believed Nasheed's government was unable to maintain in the country. The mass event became the foundation of a campaign that brought about social unrest within the capital city. 

On 16 January 2012, [46] the Maldives military, on orders from the interior ministry, unconstitutionally arrested Judge Abdulla Mohamed , the chief justice of the Maldives Criminal Court, on charges he was blocking the prosecution of corruption and human rights cases against allies of former President Gayoom. On 7 February, Nasheed ordered the police and army to subdue the anti-government protesters and allegedly told them to use force against the public. Police came out to protest against the government instead. [47] 

President Mohamed Nasheed resigned on 7 February 2012 by letter, and followed that with a televised public address informing Maldivians of his resignation. Later Nasheed told foreign media that he was deposed by a military coup led by President Waheed. There have been disputes over exactly what happened that day. Nasheed's vice president, Mohammed Waheed Hassan, was sworn in as President in accordance with the Constitution at the Peoples majlis in front of the Chief Justice. [48] 

Many countries, including the United States and the United Kingdom, were quick to abandon Nasheed, instead endorsing his successor. (The United States backtracked in late 2012 in response to widespread criticism.) [44] On 23 February 2012, the Commonwealth suspended the Maldives from its democracy and human rights watchdog while the ousting was being investigated, and backed Nasheed's call for elections before the end of 2012. [49] 

On 8 October, Nasheed was arrested after failing to appear in court to face charges that he ordered the illegal arrest of a judge while in office. However, his supporters claim that this detention was politically motivated in order to prevent him from campaigning for the 2013 presidential elections. [50] 

In March 2013 the former president Nasheed was convicted under the country's terrorism laws for ordering the arrest of an allegedly corrupt judge in 2012 and jailed for 13 years. 

Recently (Oct. 2015) Nasheed has appealed to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi , suggesting Modi has the ability to “disentangle” the Maldives from the “mess we are in”. Maldives’ international partners including the EU, US, UK and the United Nations had said his rushed trial was seriously flawed following a UN panel ruling in the former president’s favour. The UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention has called for his immediate release. [51] 

At the time Nasheed was jailed, President Mohammed Waheed Hassan announced a presidential election would be held in 2013. [52] 

The elections in late 2013 were highly contested. Former president Mohammed Nasheed won the most votes in the first round. Contrary to the assessment of international election observers, the Supreme Court cited irregularities and annulled it. In the end, the opposition combined to gain a majority. Abdulla Yameen, half-brother of the former president Gayoom, assumed the presidency. [44] 

Yameen implemented a foreign policy shift towards increased engagement with China, establishing diplomatic relations between the two countries. Yameen employed Islam as a tool of identity politics, framing religious mobilisation as the solution to perceived Western attempts to undermine Maldivian national sovereignty. Yameen’s policy of connecting Islam with anti-Western rhetoric represented a new development. [44] 

On 28 September 2015 there was an assassination attempt on President Abdulla Yameen as he was returning from Saudi Arabia after the haj pilgrimage. As his speedboat was docking at Male there was an explosion on board. Amid screams, the right door of the boat fell on the jetty and there was heavy smoke. Three people were injured, including his wife, but the President managed to escape unhurt. [53] 

In a probe of the explosion targeting president, on 24 October 2015 Maldives vice president Ahmed Adheeb was arrested at the airport upon his return from a conference in China. 17 of Adheeb's supporters were also arrested for "public order offences". The government instituted a broader crackdown against political dissent. Though the popular image of the Maldives is that of a holiday paradise, its radicalised youths are enlisting in significant numbers to fight for Islamic State militants in the Middle East. [54] 

On 4 November 2015, President Abdulla Yameen declared a 30-day state of emergency ahead of a planned anti-government rally. [55] 

On 5 November 2015 (the next day), as per the State of Emergency bill made by the President, the people's Majlis decided to rush the process for the removal of Vice president Ahmed Adeeb by a no confidence vote that was submitted by PPM Parliament than the originally intended period. As a result, the Majlis passed the no confidence vote with a majority of 61 members favouring it, removing Adeeb from the post of Vice President in the process. [56] 

On 10 November 2015, President Yameen revoked the State of Emergency citing that no imminent threats remain in the country. [57] Geography [ edit ] Main article: Geography of the Maldives Malhosmadulhu Atoll seen from space. "Fasdutere" and Southern Maalhosmadulhu Atoll can be seen in this picture. 

The Maldives consists of 1,192 coral islands grouped in a double chain of 26 atolls , along the north-south direction, spread over roughly 90,000 square kilometres (35,000 sq mi), making this one of the world's most dispersed countries. It lies between latitudes 1°S and 8°N , and longitudes 72° and 74°E . The atolls are composed of live coral reefs and sand bars , situated atop a submarine ridge 960 kilometres (600 mi) long that rises abruptly from the depths of the Indian Ocean and runs north to south. 

Only near the southern end of this natural coral barricade do two open passages permit safe ship navigation from one side of the Indian Ocean to the other through the territorial waters of Maldives. For administrative purposes the Maldivian government organised these atolls into twenty one administrative divisions . The largest island of Maldives is Gan , which belongs to Laamu Atoll or Hahdhummathi Maldives. In Addu Atoll the westernmost islands are connected by roads over the reef (collectively called Link Road ) and the total length of the road is 14 km (9 mi). 

Maldives is the lowest country in the world, with maximum and average natural ground levels of only 2.4 metres (7 ft 10 in) and 1.5 metres (4 ft 11 in) above sea level, respectively. In areas where construction exists, however, this has been increased to several metres. More than 80 per cent of the country's land is composed of coral islands which rise less than one metre above sea level. [58] As a result, the Maldives are at high risk of being submerged due to rising sea levels . The UN's environmental panel has warned that, at current rates, sea level rise would be high enough to make the Maldives uninhabitable by 2100. [59] [60] Protected areas of Maldives [ edit ] 

Protected areas of Maldives are administrated by Ministry of Environment and Energy and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of Maldives. There are 31 protected areas in Maldives. [61] Climate [ edit ] Sunset in the Maldives 

The Maldives has a tropical monsoon climate (Am) under the Köppen climate classification , which is affected by the large landmass of South Asia to the north. The presence of this landmass causes differential heating of land and water. These factors set off a rush of moisture-rich air from the Indian Ocean over South Asia, resulting in the southwest monsoon . Two seasons dominate Maldives' weather: the dry season associated with the winter northeastern monsoon and the rainy season which brings strong winds and storms. 

The shift from the dry northeast monsoon to the moist southwest monsoon occurs during April and May. During this period, the southwest winds contribute to the formation of the southwest monsoon, which reaches Maldives in the beginning of June and lasts until the end of August. However, the weather patterns of Maldives do not always conform to the monsoon patterns of South Asia. The annual rainfall averages 254 centimetres (100 in) in the north and 381 centimetres (150 in) in the south. [62] 

The monsoonal influence is greater in the north of the Maldives than in the south, more influenced by the equatorial currents . Climate data for Malé (1981–2010) Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year Record high °C (°F) 31 

(88) 33 

(91) 32 

(90) 38 

(100) 36 

(97) 35 

(95) 31 

(88) 33 

(91) 31 

(88) 34 

(93) 32 

(90) 33 

(91) 38 

(100) Average high °C (°F) 30.3 

(86.5) 30.7 

(87.3) 31.4 

(88.5) 31.6 

(88.9) 31.2 

(88.2) 30.6 

(87.1) 30.5 

(86.9) 30.4 

(86.7) 30.2 

(86.4) 30.2 

(86.4) 30.1 

(86.2) 30.1 

(86.2) 30.61 

(87.11) Daily mean °C (°F) 28.0 

(82.4) 28.3 

(82.9) 28.9 

(84) 29.2 

(84.6) 28.8 

(83.8) 28.3 

(82.9) 28.2 

(82.8) 28.0 

(82.4) 27.8 

(82) 27.8 

(82) 27.7 

(81.9) 27.8 

(82) 28.2 

(82.8) Average low °C (°F) 25.7 

(78.3) 25.9 

(78.6) 26.4 

(79.5) 26.8 

(80.2) 26.3 

(79.3) 26.0 

(78.8) 25.8 

(78.4) 25.5 

(77.9) 25.3 

(77.5) 25.4 

(77.7) 25.2 

(77.4) 25.4 

(77.7) 25.8 

(78.4) Record low °C (°F) 17 

(63) 17 

(63) 22 

(72) 22 

(72) 22 

(72) 22 

(72) 21 

(70) 21 

(70) 22 

(72) 21 

(70) 20 

(68) 21 

(70) 17 

(63) Average rainfall mm (inches) 114.2 

(4.496) 38.1 

(1.5) 73.9 

(2.909) 122.5 

(4.823) 218.9 

(8.618) 167.3 

(6.587) 149.9 

(5.902) 175.5 

(6.909) 199.0 

(7.835) 194.2 

(7.646) 231.1 

(9.098) 216.8 

(8.535) 1,901.4 

(74.858) Average precipitation days (≥ 1.0 mm) 6 3 5 9 15 13 12 13 15 15 13 12 131 Average relative humidity (%) 78.0 77.0 76.9 78.1 80.8 80.7 79.1 80.5 81.0 81.7 82.2 80.9 79.7 Mean monthly sunshine hours 248.4 257.8 279.6 246.8 223.2 202.3 226.6 211.5 200.4 234.8 226.1 220.7 2,778.2 Source #1: World Meteorological Organization [63] Source #2: NOAA (relative humidity and sun 1961–1990) [64] Environmental issues [ edit ] The white sandy beaches of Maldives See also: The Island President 

According to former Maldivian president Mohamed Nasheed , the Maldives are ranked the third most endangered nation due to flooding from climate change . [65] In March and April 2012, Nasheed stated, "If carbon emissions were to stop today, the planet would not see a difference for 60 to 70 years." "If carbon emissions continue at the rate they are climbing today, my country will be under water in seven years." He called for more climate change mitigation action while on the American television shows The Daily Show [66] and the Late Show with David Letterman . [67] 

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 's 2007 report predicted the upper limit of the sea level rises will be 59 centimetres (23 in) by 2100, which means that most of the republic's 200 inhabited islands may need to be abandoned. [68] One study appears to show that the sea level in the Maldives dropped 20–30 centimetres (8–12 in) throughout the 1970s and '80s, although later studies failed to back this up. [69] The observed rate of sea level rise is only 1.7–1.8 millimetres per year. [70] 

In November 2008, President Mohamed Nasheed announced plans to look into purchasing new land in India, Sri Lanka, and Australia because of his concerns about global warming, and the possibility of much of the islands being inundated with water from rising sea levels. The purchase of land will be made from a fund generated by tourism. [71] The President has explained his intentions: "We do not want to leave the Maldives, but we also do not want to be climate refugees living in tents for decades". [72] On 22 April 2008, then President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom pleaded for a cut in global greenhouse gas emissions, warning that rising sea levels could submerge the island nation of Maldives. [73] [74] 

By 2020, Maldives plans to eliminate or offset all of its greenhouse gas emissions. At the 2009 International Climate Talks, President Mohamed Nasheed explained that: 

For us swearing off fossil fuels is not only the right thing to do, it is in our economic self-interest... Pioneering countries will free themselves from the unpredictable price of foreign oil; they will capitalise on the new green economy of the future, and they will enhance their moral standing giving them greater political influence on the world stage. [75] 

Other environmental issues include bad waste disposal and beach theft . Although the Maldives are kept relatively pristine and little litter can be found on the islands, no good waste disposal sites exist. Most trash from Male and other resorts is simply dumped at Thilafushi . [76] Marine ecosystem [ edit ] Further information: Wildlife of Maldives Oriental Sweetlips ( Plectorhinchus vittatus ) at Meeru Island , North Male Atoll 

Maldivian waters are home to several ecosystems, but are most noted for their variety of colourful coral reefs , home to 1100 species of fish, 5 species of sea turtles , 21 species of whales and dolphins, 187 species of corals, 400 species of molluscs, and 83 species of echinoderms. Many crustacean species are there as well: 120 copepod, 15 amphipod as well as over 145 crab and 48 shrimp species. [77] 

Among the many marine families represented are Pufferfish , Fusiliers , Jackfish , Lionfish , Oriental Sweetlips , reef sharks, Groupers , Eels , Snappers , Bannerfish , Batfish , Humphead Wrasse , Spotted Eagle Rays , Scorpionfish , Lobsters , Nudibranches , Angelfish , Butterflyfish , Squirrelfish , Soldierfish , Glassfish , Surgeonfish , Unicornfish [ disambiguation needed ] , Triggerfish , Napoleon wrasses , and Barracudas . [78] 

These coral reefs are home to a variety of marine ecosystems that vary from planktonic organisms to whale sharks. Sponges have gained importance as five species have displayed anti-tumor and anti-cancer properties. [79] 

In 1998, sea-temperature warming of as much as 5 °C (9.0 °F) due to a single El Niño phenomenon event caused coral bleaching , killing ⅔ of the nation's coral reefs. [80] 

In an effort to induce the regrowth of the reefs, scientists placed electrified cones anywhere from 20–60 feet (6.1–18.3 m) below the surface to provide a substrate for larval coral attachment. In 2004, scientists witnessed corals regenerating. Corals began to eject pink-orange eggs and sperm. The growth of these electrified corals was five times faster than ordinary corals. [80] Scientist Azeez Hakim stated: 

before 1998, we never thought that this reef would die. We had always taken for granted that these animals would be there, that this reef would be there forever. El Niño gave us a wake-up call that these things are not going to be there for ever. Not only this, they also act as a natural barrier against the tropical storms, floods and tsunamis. Seaweeds grow on the skeletons of dead coral. [78] 

Recent scientific studies suggest that the faunistic composition can vary greatly between neighbour atolls, especially in terms of benthic fauna. Differences in terms of fishing pressure (including poaching) could be the cause. [81] Government [ edit ] Main article: Politics of the Maldives Independence Square in Malé 

Maldives is a presidential republic, with the President as head of government and head of state . The President heads the executive branch and appoints the cabinet which is approved by the People's Majlis (Parliament) . Following the introduction of a new constitution in 2008, direct elections for the President take place every five years, with a limit of two terms in office for any individual. The current President is Abdulla Yameen . [82] Members of the unicameral Majlis serve five-year terms, with the total number of members determined by atoll populations. At the 2009 election , 77 members were elected. The People's Majlis, located in Male, houses members from all over the country. [3] 

The republican constitution came into force in 1968, and was amended in 1970, 1972, and 1975. On 27 November 1997 it was replaced by another Constitution assented to by the President Gayoom . This Constitution came into force on 1 January 1998. All stated that the president was the Head of State, Head of Government and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and the Police of the Maldives. A third Constitution was ratified in 2008, which separated the judiciary from the head of state. Law [ edit ] See also: Judiciary in the Maldives 

According to the Constitution of Maldives , "the judges are independent, and subject only to the Constitution and the law. When deciding matters on which the Constitution or the law is silent, judges must consider Islamic Shari'ah ". Article 15 of the Act Number 1/81 (Penal Code) gives provision for hudud punishments. [83] Article 156 of the constitution states that law includes the norms and provisions of sharia. [84] 

Islam is the official religion of the Maldives and open practice of any other religion is forbidden and liable to prosecution. Article 2 of the revised constitution says that the republic "is based on the principles of Islam". Article nine says that "a non-Muslim may not become a citizen"; article ten says that "no law contrary to any principle of Islam can be applied". Article nineteen states that "citizens are free to participate in or carry out any activity that is not expressly prohibited by sharia [Islamic law] or by the law". 

The requirement to adhere to a particular religion and prohibition of public worship following other religions is contrary to Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which Maldives has recently become party [85] and was addressed in Maldives' reservation in adhering to the Covenant claiming that "The application of the principles set out in Article 18 of the Covenant shall be without prejudice to the Constitution of the Republic of the Maldives." [86] Human rights [ edit ] Main article: Human rights in the Maldives 

Human rights in the Maldive is a contentious issue, in its 2011 Freedom in the World report, Freedom House declared the Maldives "Partly Free", claiming a reform process which had made headway in 2009 and 2010 had stalled. [87] The United States Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor claims in their 2012 report on human rights practices in the country that the most significant problems are corruption, lack of religious freedom , and abuse and unequal treatment of women. [88] Foreign relations [ edit ] Main article: Foreign relations of the Maldives Former Maldivian Defence Minister Mohamed Nazim at an Indian naval base in Kochi . 

Since 1996, the Maldives has been the official progress monitor of the Indian Ocean Commission . In 2002, the Maldives began to express interest in the commission but as of 2008 [update] had not applied for membership. Maldive's interest relates to its identity as a small island state, especially economic development and environmental preservation, and its desire for closer relations with France, a main actor in the IOC region. The Maldives is a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation , SAARC. The republic joined the Commonwealth in 1982, some 17 years after gaining independence from Great Britain. In October 2016, Maldives announced its withdrawal from the Commonwealth [89] in protest at allegations of human rights abuse and failing democracy. [90] The Maldives enjoys close ties with Commonwealth members Seychelles and Mauritius . The Maldives and Comoros are also both members of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation . Military [ edit ] Main article: Maldives National Defence Force Fire Rescue Service boats. 

The Maldives National Defence Force is the combined security organisation responsible for defending the security and sovereignty of the Maldives, having the primary task of being responsible for attending to all internal and external security needs of the Maldives, including the protection of the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and the maintenance of peace and security. The MNDF component branches are the Coast Guard, Marine Corps, Special Forces, Service Corps and the Corps of Engineers. 

As a water-bound nation much of the security concerns lie at sea. Almost 99% of the country is covered by sea and the remaining 1% land is scattered over an area of 800 km (497 mi) × 120 km (75 mi), with the largest island being not more than 8 km 2 (3 sq mi). Therefore, the duties assigned to the MNDF of maintaining surveillance over Maldives' waters and providing protection against foreign intruders poaching in the EEZ and territorial waters, are immense tasks from both logistical and economic view points. 

The Coast Guard plays a vital role in carrying out these function. To provide timely security its patrol boats are stationed at various MNDF Regional Headquarters. The Coast Guard is also assigned to respond to the maritime distress calls and to conduct search and rescue operations in a timely manner. Maritime pollution control exercises are conducted regularly on an annual basis for familiarisation and handling of such hazardous situations. Administrative divisions [ edit ] Main article: Administrative divisions of the Maldives Each administrative atoll is marked, along with the thaana letter used to identify the atoll. Natural atolls are labelled in light blue. Full view of the map . 

The Maldives has twenty-six natural atolls and few island groups on isolated reefs, all of which have been divided into twenty-one administrative divisions (twenty administrative atolls and Malé city). [91] 

Each atoll is administered by an elected Atoll Council. The islands are administered by an elected Island Council. 

Between 2008 and 2010 the Maldives had 7 provinces each consisting of the following administrative divisions (the capital Malé is its own administrative division): Mathi-Uthuru Province ; consists of Haa Alif Atoll , Haa Dhaalu Atoll and Shaviyani Atoll . Uthuru Province ; consists of Noonu Atoll , Raa Atoll , Baa Atoll and Lhaviyani Atoll . Medhu-Uthuru Province ; consists of Kaafu Atoll , Alifu Alifu Atoll , Alifu Dhaalu Atoll and Vaavu Atoll . Medhu Province ; consists of Meemu Atoll , Faafu Atoll and Dhaalu Atoll . Medhu-Dhekunu Province ; consists of Thaa Atoll and Laamu Atoll . Mathi-Dhekunu Province ; consists of Gaafu Alifu Atoll and Gaafu Dhaalu Atoll . Dhekunu Province ; consists of Gnaviyani Atoll and Addu City . 

In addition to a name, every administrative division is identified by the Maldivian code letters, such as " Haa Alif " for Thiladhunmati Uthuruburi (Thiladhunmathi North); and by a Latin code letter. The first corresponds to the geographical Maldivian name of the atoll; the second is a code adopted for convenience. As there are certain islands in different atolls that have the same name, for administrative purposes this code is quoted before the name of the island, for example: Baa Funadhoo, Kaafu Funadhoo, Gaafu-Alifu Funadhoo. Since most Atolls have very long geographical names it is also used whenever the long name is inconvenient, for example in the atoll website names. [92] 

The introduction of code-letter names has been a source of much puzzlement and misunderstandings, especially among foreigners. Many people have come to think that the code-letter of the administrative atoll is its new name and that it has replaced its geographical name. Under such circumstances it is hard to know which is the correct name to use. [92] Economy [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2016) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Main article: Economy of the Maldives Malé harbour Graphical depiction of Maldives's product exports in 28 color-coded categories. 

In ancient times the Maldives were renowned for cowry shells , coir rope, dried tuna fish (Maldive Fish), ambergris (Maavaharu), and coco de mer (Tavakkaashi). Local and foreign trading ships used to load these products in Sri Lanka and transport them to other harbours in the Indian Ocean. 

Historically Maldives provided enormous quantities of cowry shells, an international currency of the early ages . From the 2nd century AD the islands were known as the 'Money Isles' by the Arabs. [93] Monetaria moneta were used for centuries as a currency in Africa, and huge amounts of Maldivian cowries were introduced into Africa by western nations during the period of slave trade . [94] The cowry is now the symbol of the Maldives Monetary Authority . 

The Maldivian government began an economic reform programme in 1989, initially by lifting import quotas and opening some exports to the private sector. Subsequently, it has liberalised regulations to allow more foreign investment. Real GDP growth averaged over 7.5% per year for more than a decade. Today, the Maldives' largest industry is tourism, accounting for 28% of GDP and more than 60% of the Maldives' foreign exchange receipts. Fishing is the second leading sector. 

The Maldivian economy is to a large degree based on tourism. In late December 2004, the major tsunami left more than 100 dead , 12,000 displaced, and property damage exceeding $400 million. As a result of the tsunami, the GDP contracted by about 3.6% in 2005. A rebound in tourism, post-tsunami reconstruction, and development of new resorts helped the economy recover quickly and showed an 18% increase on 2006. 2013 estimates show Maldivians enjoy the highest GDP (PPP) per capita $11,900 (2013 est) among south Asian countries. 

Agriculture and manufacturing continue to play a lesser role in the economy, constrained by the limited availability of cultivable land and the shortage of domestic labour. Tourism gave a major boost to the country's fledgling traditional cottage industries such as mat weaving, lacquer work, handicraft , and coir rope making. New industries that have since emerged include printing, production of PVC pipes , brick making, marine engine repairs, bottling of aerated water , and garment production. Tourism [ edit ] Filitheyo island beach with tall palm trees and blue lagoons Main articles: Tourism in the Maldives and Diving in the Maldives 

The Maldives remained largely unknown to tourists until the early 1970s. Only 185 islands are home to its 300,000 inhabitants. The other islands are used entirely for economic purposes, of which tourism and agriculture are the most dominant. Tourism accounts for 28% of the GDP and more than 60% of the Maldives' foreign exchange receipts. Over 90% of government tax revenue comes from import duties and tourism-related taxes. The development of tourism fostered the overall growth of the country's economy . It created direct and indirect employment and income generation opportunities in other related industries. The first tourist resorts were opened in 1972 with Bandos island resort and Kurumba Village (the current name is Kurumba Maldives), [95] which transformed the Maldives economy. The resort island of Landaa Giraavaru (Baa atoll) 

According to the Ministry of Tourism , the emergence of tourism in 1972 transformed the economy, moving rapidly from dependence on fisheries to tourism. In just three and a half decades, the industry became the main source of income. Tourism was also the country's biggest foreign currency earner and the single largest contributor to the GDP. As of 2008 [update] , 89 resorts in the Maldives offered over 17,000 beds and hosted over 600,000 tourists annually. [96] 

The number of resorts increased from 2 to 92 between 1972 and 2007. As of 2007 [update] , over 8,380,000 tourists had visited Maldives. [97] 

Visitors to Maldives do not need to apply for a visa pre-arrival, regardless of their country of origin, provided they have a valid passport, proof of onward travel, and the money to be self-sufficient while in the country. [98] 

Most visitors arrive at Malé International Airport , on Hulhulé Island, adjacent to the capital Malé. The airport is served by flights to India, Sri Lanka, Doha , Dubai , Singapore, Istanbul, and major airports in South-East Asia, as well as charters from Europe. Gan Airport , on the southern atoll of Addu , also serves an international flight to Milan several times a week. British Airways offer direct flights to the Maldives around 2–3 times per week. Fishing industry [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2016) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Main article: Fishing industry in the Maldives A mechanised traditional inter-island dhoni stripped of its sails 

For many centuries the Maldivian economy was entirely dependent on fishing and other marine products. Fishing remains the main occupation of the people and the government gives priority to the fisheries sector. 

The mechanisation of the traditional fishing boat called dhoni in 1974 was a major milestone in the development of the fisheries industry. A fish canning plant was installed on Felivaru in 1977, as a joint venture with a Japanese firm. In 1979, a Fisheries Advisory Board was set up with the mandate of advising the government on policy guidelines for the overall development of the fisheries sector. Manpower development programmes began in the early 1980s, and fisheries education was incorporated into the school curriculum. Fish aggregating devices and navigational aids were located at various strategic points. Moreover, the opening up of the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of the Maldives for fisheries has further enhanced the growth of the fisheries sector. 

As of 2010 [update] , fisheries contributed over 15% of the country's GDP and engaged about 30% of the country's work force. Fisheries were also the second-largest foreign exchange earner after tourism . Demographics [ edit ] Main article: Demographics of the Maldives This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2012) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Malé , the capital of the Maldives 

The Maldivian ethnic identity is a blend of the cultures reflecting the peoples who settled on the islands, reinforced by religion and language. The earliest settlers were probably from southern India and Sri Lanka. They are linguistically and ethnically related to the people in the Indian subcontinent . They are ethnically known as Dhivehis . 

Some social stratification exists on the islands. It is not rigid, since rank is based on varied factors, including occupation, wealth, Islamic virtue, and family ties. Instead of a complex caste system, there was merely a distinction between noble (bēfulhu) and common people in the Maldives. Members of the social elite are concentrated in Malé. 

The population doubled by 1978, and the population growth rate peaked at 3.4% in 1985. At the 2006 census, the population had reached 298,968, [99] although the census in 2000 showed that the population growth rate had declined to 1.9%. Life expectancy at birth stood at 46 years in 1978, and later rose to 72. Infant mortality has declined from 12.7% in 1977 to 1.2% today, and adult literacy reached 99%. Combined school enrolment reached the high 90s. The population was projected to have reached 317,280 in 2010. [100] 

As of April 2008, more than 70,000 foreign employees, along with 33,000 illegal immigrants, comprised more than one third of the Maldivian population. [ citation needed ] . There are 40,000 Bangladeshis in Maldives making them the largest group of foreigners working in that country. [101] Religion [ edit ] Maldives religions (2010) [102] Islam   98.4% other   1.6% See also: Islam in the Maldives , Buddhism in the Maldives , and Freedom of religion in the Maldives Mosque in Hulhumalé 

After the long Buddhist [103] period of Maldivian history, Muslim traders introduced Sunni Islam. Maldivians converted to Islam by the mid-12th century. The islands have had a long history of Sufic orders, as can be seen in the history of the country such as the building of tombs. They were used until as recently as the 1980s for seeking the help of buried saints . They can be seen today next to some old mosques and are considered today as cultural heritage . Other aspects of tassawuf , such as ritualised dhikr ceremonies called Maulūdu ( Mawlid ) — the liturgy of which included recitations and certain supplications in a melodical tone—existed until very recent times. These Maulūdu festivals were held in ornate tents specially built for the occasion. At present Sunni Islam is the official religion of the entire population, as adherence to it is required for citizenship. 

According to Moroccan traveller Ibn Battuta , the person responsible for this conversion was a Sunni Muslim visitor named Abu al-Barakat , sailing from Morocco . He is also referred to as Tabrizugefaanu . His venerated tomb now stands on the grounds of the Friday Mosque, or Hukuru Miskiy , in Malé. Built in 1656, this is the country's oldest mosque. Languages [ edit ] 

The official and common language is Dhivehi , an Indo-Aryan language having some similarities with Elu , the ancient Sinhalese language. The first known script used to write Dhivehi is Eveyla akuru script which is found in historical recording of kings ( raadhavalhi ). Later a script called Dhives akuru was used for a long period. The present-day script is called Thaana and is written from right to left. Thaana is said to have been introduced by the reign of Mohamed Thakurufaanu . Population by locality [ edit ] v t e Largest localities in Maldives 

by registered population as of July 4, 2012 Rank Name Division Pop. 

Malé 



Addu City 1 Malé Malé 62,567 

Fuvahmulah 



Kulhudhuffushi 2 Addu City Addu Atoll 31,999 3 Fuvahmulah Gnaviyani Atoll 11,857 4 Kulhudhuffushi Haa Dhaalu 8,974 5 Thinadhoo Gaafu Dhaalu 7,108 6 Naifaru Lhaviyani 5,133 7 Hinnavaru Lhaviyani 4,676 8 Gan Laamu 4,385 9 Dhuvaafaru Raa 4,368 10 Dhidhdhoo Haa Alifu 3,848 Population by locality (2012) Culture [ edit ] Main article: Culture of the Maldives See also: Music of the Maldives and Maldivian folklore This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2011) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Thaana script The Islamic Centre , housing the mosque Masjid-al-Sultan Mohammed Thakurufaanu-al-A'z'am 

Since the 12th century AD there were also influences from Arabia in the language and culture of the Maldives because of the conversion to Islam and its location as a crossroads in the central Indian Ocean. This was due to the long trading history between the far east and the middle east. Somali travellers discovered the island for gold in the 13th century, before the Portuguese. Their brief stay later ended in a bloody conflict known by the Somalis as "Dagaal Diig Badaaney" in 1424. 

However, unlike the Sinhalese of Sri Lanka and most of the Arabs, Africans and Europeans whose influence can be seen in borrow-words, material culture, and the diversity of Maldivian phenotype, Maldivians do not have the highly embedded patriarchal codes of honour, purity, corporate marriage, and sedentary private property that are typical of places where agriculture is the key form of subsistence and social relations have been built, historically, around tribute taking. [ citation needed ] 

Reflective of this is the fact that the Maldives has had the highest national divorce rate in the world for many decades. This, it is hypothesised, is due to a combination of liberal Islamic rules about divorce and the relatively loose marital bonds that have been identified as common in non- and semi-sedentary peoples without a history of fully developed agrarian property and kinship relations. [104] Transportation [ edit ] TMA Terminal 

Ibrahim Nasir International Airport is the principal gateway to the Maldives. International travel is available on a number of major airlines. Two Maldives based airlines also operate international flights. Privately owned MEGA Maldives Airlines has Boeing 757 and 767 aircraft and operates frequent services to Beijing, Shanghai, and Hong Kong. Government owned Island Aviation Services (branded as Maldivian) operates to nearly all of Maldives domestic airports with several Dash-8 aircraft and one A320 with international service to Chennai and Thiruvananthapuram, India, and Dhaka, Bangladesh. 

In Maldives there are three main ways to move around: by domestic flight, by seaplane or by boat. [105] For several years there were two seaplanes companies operating: TMA, Trans Maldivian Airways , and Maldivian Air Taxi , but these merged in 2013 under the name TMA. The seaplane fleet is entirely made up of DHC-6 "Twin Otters." There is also another airline, flyMe, which operates using ATRs to domestic airports, principally Maamagili and some others. The typical Maldivian boat is called dhoni . Depending on the distance of the destination island to the airport, resorts organise domestic flight plus boat transfers, seaplane flights directly to the resort island jetty, or speedboat trips for their guests. There are also locally run ferries by large dhoni boats. Speedboats and seaplanes tend to be more expensive, while travel by dhoni, although longer, is relatively cheaper and convenient. Education [ edit ] 

The Maldives National University was inaugurated on 15 February 2011. Previously known as the Maldives College of Higher Education, it was established on 1 January 1999, as part of a restructuring and rationalisation of all government-run post-secondary education in Maldives. It is the only public degree-granting institution in the nation and offers a range of degrees, diplomas, and certificates, with particular emphasis on engineering, health science, education, tourism, and management. [106] See also [ edit ] Outline of Maldives Index of Maldives-related articles Commonwealth of Nations List of island countries 27596 Maldives , a minor planet named after the nation Maldives Ancient Desalination System Notes [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ Levinson, David (1947). Ethnic groups worldwide: a ready reference handbook . Oryx Publishers. ISBN 978-1-57356-019-1 . ^ a b c Maloney, Clarence. "Maldives People" . International Institute for Asian Studies . Retrieved 22 June 2008 . ^ a b "Maldives Enthongraphy" . Maldives-ethnography.com . Retrieved 30 June 2010 . ^ "The President's Office - His Excellency Abdulla Jihad sworn in as Vice President" . www.presidencymaldives.gov.mv . Retrieved 2016-06-22 . ^ "Eighteenth People's Majlis elects Speaker and Deputy Speaker" . People’s Majlis. 28 May 2014. ^ "Supreme Court of the Maldives" . supremecourt.gov.mv . ^ "FIELD LISTING :: AREA" . CIA World Factbook . CIA World Factbook . Retrieved 27 January 2016 . ^ "Maldives" . CIA World Factbook . ^ "GeoHive – Maldives Population" . GeoHive . ^ a b c d "Maldives" . International Monetary Fund . Retrieved 2014 . Check date values in: |access-date= ( help ) ^ "2015 Human Development Report Statistical Annex" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme. 2015. p. 17 . Retrieved 14 December 2015 . ^ "2015 Human Development Report Statistical Annex" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme. 2015. p. 13 . Retrieved 14 December 2015 . ^ "Maldives" . Dictionary.reference.com . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ World Wildlife Fund (2001). "Maldives-Lakshadweep-Chagos Archipelago tropical moist forests" . WildWorld Ecoregion Profile . National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 2010-03-08 . Retrieved 30 December 2010 . ^ a b Henley, Jon (11 November 2008). "The last days of paradise" . The Guardian . London . Retrieved 12 May 2010 . [The Maldives] holds the record for the country with the lowest high point on earth: nowhere on the Maldives does the natural ground level exceed 2.3m. Most of [the Maldives'] land mass, which totals roughly one-fifth of Greater London, is a great deal lower [...], averaging around 1.5m. ^ "Copenhagen Accord" (PDF) . New York Times. 18 December 2009 . Retrieved 2 July 2013 . ^ "Maldives - Country report - Freedom in the World - 2015" . ^ Upper middle income World Bank . Retrieved 18 September 2015. ^ http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr_2015_statistical_annex.pdf ^ a b Hogendorn, Jan and Johnson Marion (1986). The Shell Money of the Slave Trade . African Studies Series 49, Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ISBN 0521541107 , pp. 20–22 ^ P. E. P Deraniyagala in Senarat Paranavitana; Leelananda Prematilleka; Johanna Engelberta van Lohuizen-De Leeuw (1978). Senarat Paranavitana Commemoration Volume . BRILL. pp. 52–. ISBN 978-90-04-05455-4 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 . ^ "Altername Names for Republic of Maldives" . Geonames.org . Retrieved 23 September 2013 . ^ Apte, Vaman Shivram (1985). Sanskrit-English Dictionary . Motilal Banarsidass, New Delhi, 1985. ^ Ibn Batuta Travels in Asia and Africa . translated by A. R. Gibb. ^ Akhbar al-Sin wa 'l-Hind (Notes on China and India), which dates from 851. ^ "The Seas of Sinbad" . Saudi Aramco World . 56 (4). 2005. ^ Xavier Romero-Frias , The Maldive Islanders, A Study of the Popular Culture of an Ancient Ocean Kingdom . Barcelona 1999, ISBN 84-7254-801-5 . ^ Philostorgius, Church History , tr. Amidon, pp.41–44; Philostorgius' history survives in fragments, and he wrote some 75 years later than these events. ^ This was in order to care for a shipwrecked British steamer's load. Bell moreover had the chance to spend two or three in Malé, on same occasion. See: Bethia Nancy Bell, Heather M. Bell: H.C.P. Bell: Archaeologist of Ceylon and the Maldives, p.16. ^ a b "The Lion Throne Coronation Proclamation of King Siri Kula Sudha Ira Siyaaka Saathura Audha Keerithi Katthiri Bovana" . Maldives Royal Family . 21 July 1938. ^ "Legend of Koimala Kalou" . Maldives Royal Family . ^ The Adventures of Ibn Battuta: A Muslim Traveller of the Fourteenth Century ^ "Richard Bulliet – History of the World to 1500 CE (Session 22) – Tropical Africa and Asia" . Youtube.com. 23 November 2010 . Retrieved 23 September 2013 . ^ Paul, Ludwig (2003). Persian Origins--: Early Judaeo-Persian and the Emergence of New Persian : Collected Papers of the Symposium, Göttingen 1999 . Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 31. ISBN 978-3-447-04731-9 . ^ Boomgaard, P. (1 January 2008). "Linking Destinies: Trade, Towns and Kin in Asian History" . BRILL – via Google Books. ^ "The Sun never sets on the British Empire" . Gan.philliptsmall.me.uk. 17 May 1971 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ " Maldives – Population". Library of Congress Country Studies ^ a b c CNN (11 November 2008). "Sinking island nation seeks new home" . Retrieved 12 November 2008 . BAT ^ "Maldives – Country Review Report on the Implementation of the Brussels Programme of Action for LDCS" (PDF) . ^ "Maldives Skyscraper – Floating States" . UN.org . ^ "UNDP: Discussion Paper – Achieving Debt Sustainability and the MDGs in Small Island Developing States: The Case of the Maldives" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 January 2012. ^ "Maldives tsunami damage 62 percent of GDP: WB" . 15 February 2005 . Retrieved 18 September 2015 . ^ "Republic of Maldives – Tsunami: Impact and Recovery" (PDF) . undp.org.mv . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2012 . Retrieved 18 September 2015 . ^ a b c d Autocracy and Back Again: The Ordeal of the Maldives . Brown Political Review. Retrieved on 10 May 2016. ^ Raajje News (7 May 2009). "he Quality of Political Appointees in the Nasheed Administration" . Retrieved 21 February 2012 . ^ Voigt, Kevin (8 February 2012). "Q A: The Maldives – Trouble in paradise" . CNN . Retrieved 10 February 2012 . ^ "The truth about the alleged coup … a series of deliberate actions by Nasheed?" . 1 March 2012. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. ^ Al Jazeera (9 February 2012). "Maldives president quits after protests" . Retrieved 6 February 2012 . ^ Griffiths, Peter (22 February 2012). "Commonwealth suspends Maldives from rights group, seeks elections" . In.reuters.com. ^ The Huffington Post, ed. (8 October 2012). "Mohamed Nasheed, Former Maldives President, Arrested After Failing To Appear In Court" . Retrieved 18 September 2015 . ^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 21 October 2015 . Retrieved 24 October 2015 . ^ Maldives Election: President Mohammed Waheed Hassan Calls For Early Vote In 2013 . Huffington Post (18 April 2012) ^ Maldives President Escapes Unhurt After Explosion on Boat . Time.com (28 September 2015). Retrieved on 2016-05-10. ^ Bosley, Daniel. (24 October 2015) Maldives vice president arrested in probe of explosion targeting president . Reuters. Retrieved on 2016-05-10. ^ Maldives declares 30-day emergency – BBC News . Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved on 10 May 2016. ^ "Majlis passes declaration to remove VP from office" . 5 November 2015 . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ "Maldives revokes state of emergency amid global outcry and tourism worries" . Retrieved 10 November 2015 . ^ "Entire Maldives cabinet resigns" . Al Jazeera English. 29 June 2010 . Retrieved 30 June 2010 . ^ Megan Angelo (1 May 2009). "Honey, I Sunk the Maldives: Environmental changes could wipe out some of the world's most well-known travel destinations" . ^ Kristina Stefanova (19 April 2009). "Climate refugees in Pacific flee rising sea" . ^ "Protected Areas – Maldives" . epa.gov.mv . Environmental Protection Agency . Retrieved 25 May 2013 . ^ "Maldives – Atlapedia Online" . ^ "World Weather Information Service – Malé" . WMO . Retrieved 17 March 2016 . ^ "Malé Climate 1961–90" . NOAA . Retrieved 17 March 2016 . ^ Stephen, Marcus (14 November 2011). "A sinking feeling: Why is the president of the tiny Pacific island nation of Nauru so concerned about climate change?" . The New York Times Upfront . Retrieved 9 February 2015 . Most Endangered Island nations at highest risk for flooding due to climate change 3 Maldives (Indian Ocean) ^ "Exclusive – Mohamed Nasheed Extended Interview Pt. 2" . Thedailyshow.com. 2 April 2012 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ World Nation (6 April 2012). "Endangered island nations call for global action on climate change" . Guilfordian.com. ^ "Where climate change threatens survival" . The Sydney Morning Herald . 9 January 2012 . Retrieved 18 September 2015 . ^ Mörner N.-A.; Tooley M. Possnert, G (7 May 2003). "New Perspectives for the future of the Maldives" (PDF) . Retrieved 18 September 2015 . ^ Sea Level Trends – Global Regional Trends . Tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov (15 October 2013). Retrieved on 2016-05-10. ^ Ramesh, Randeep (10 November 2008). "Paradise almost lost: Maldives seek to buy a new homeland" . The Guardian . London . Retrieved 12 May 2010 . ^ Ramesh, Randeep (10 November 2008). "Paradise almost lost: Maldives seek to buy a new homeland" . The Guardian . London . Retrieved 30 June 2010 . ^ (AFP) – 22 April, "awareness of threats from climate change to low-lying nations such as the Maldives." ^ Lang, Olivia (17 October 2009). "Maldives leader in climate change stunt" . BBC News . Retrieved 19 October 2010 . ^ "Climate Change Gridlock: Where Do We Go From Here? (Part 1)" . Making Contact . National Radio Project. 28 June 2011 . Retrieved 30 June 2011 . ^ Hall, Chris (23 June 2012). "Paradise trashed: The beautiful island in the Maldives that's been reduced to a pile of rubbish" . London: Dailymail.co.uk . Retrieved 18 September 2015 . ^ "Fourth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity of Maldives" (PDF) . Ministry of Housing and Environment. p. 7 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ a b "Maldives Marine Life" . Scubadivemaldives.com . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ "Regional Workshop on the Conservation and Sustainable Management of Coral Reefs" . Fao.org . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ a b "Maldives Nurses Its Coral Reefs Back to Life" . Globalcoral.org. 2 May 2004. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ Frédéric Ducarme (2016). "Field observations of sea cucumbers in Ari Atoll, and comparison with two nearby atolls in Maldives" (PDF) . SPC Beche-de-mer Information Bulletin . 36 . ^ "Maldives' VP Hassan Takes Oath as President" . Time Magazine . Male, Maldives. Associated Press. 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 7 February 2012 . ^ "Maldives Penal Code" (PDF) . Retrieved 19 February 2013 . ^ "Maldives" . Law.emory.edu. 16 March 1983 . Retrieved 18 February 2013 . ^ "Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Maldives" . Foreign.gov.mv . Retrieved 30 June 2010 . ^ Davis, Thomas W. D. (2011). Human Rights in Asia . Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 33. ISBN 978-1-84844-680-9 . ^ Freedom House (2011). "Freedom in the World 2011: Maldives" . Freedom House . Retrieved 25 August 2012 . ^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2012). "Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2011: Maldives" . United States Department of State . Retrieved 24 August 2012 . ^ http://thecommonwealth.org/media/news/secretary-general-statement-maldives-decision-leave-commonwealth ^ https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/13/maldives-quits-commonwealth-over-alleged-rights-abuses ^ "Maldives Atolls" . Statoids.com . Retrieved 30 June 2010 . ^ a b Divehiraajjege Jōgrafīge Vanavaru . Muhammadu Ibrahim Lutfee ^ Lyon, James (October 2003). Maldives . Lonely Planet Publications Pty Ltd. p. 9. ISBN 978-1-74059-176-8 . ^ Hogendorn, Jan and Johnson Marion (1986). The Shell Money of the Slave Trade . African Studies Series 49, Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ISBN 0521541107 . ^ "Coup? What coup? Tourists ignore Maldives turmoil" . The Age . Melbourne. 13 February 2012. ^ "Ministry of Tourism. Retrieved 3 April 2009" . Tourism.gov.mv . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ "35 years of tourism" (PDF) . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ "Entry into Maldives" . Department of Immigration and Emigration, Republic of Maldives . Retrieved 9 February 2012 . ^ "Islands by Population Size and Percentage Share of Total Population" . Maldives: Population and Housing Census 2006 . Ministry of Planning and National Development . Retrieved 8 February 2012 . ^ "Census Analysis 2006. Population Projection 2006 - 2050" (PDF) . planning.gov.mv . p. 273 . Retrieved 5 July 2014 . ^ Maldives to recruit more Bangladeshi workers, SATURDAY, 02 AUGUST 2008 . ^ Maldives . globalreligiousfutures.org ^ "Conversion of the Maldives to Islam" . maldivesstory.com.mv . [ dead link ] ^ Marcus, Anthony. 2012. Reconsidering Talaq: Marriage, Divorce and Sharia Reform in the Republic of Maldives in Chitra Raghavan and James Levine. Self-Determination and Women’s Rights in Muslim Societies. Lebanon, NH: Brandeis University Press ^ Maldives – Élite Diving Agency . Elitedivingagency.com. Retrieved on 29 January 2014. ^ "The Maldives National University – Home" . mnu.edu.mv . Retrieved 14 September 2014 . Further reading [ edit ] Divehiraajjege Jōgrafīge Vanavaru . Muhammadu Ibrahim Lutfee. G.Sōsanī. Malé 1999. H. C. P. Bell , The Maldive Islands, An account of the Physical Features, History, Inhabitants, Productions and Trade . Colombo 1883, ISBN 81-206-1222-1 . H.C.P. Bell, The Maldive Islands; Monograph on the History, Archaeology and Epigraphy . Reprint Colombo 1940. Council for Linguistic and Historical Research. Malé 1989. H.C.P. Bell, Excerpta Maldiviana . Reprint Colombo 1922/35 edn. Asian Educational Services. New Delhi 1999. Divehi Tārīkhah Au Alikameh. Divehi Bahāi Tārikhah Khidmaiykurā Qaumī Markazu . Reprint 1958 edn. Malé, Maldives 1990. Christopher, William (1836–38). Transactions of the Bombay Geographical Society , Vol. I. Bombay. Lieut. I.A. Young W. Christopher, Memoirs on the Inhabitants of the Maldive Islands . Geiger, Wilhelm . Maldivian Linguistic Studies . Reprint 1919 edn. Asian Educational Services. Delhi 1999. Hockly, T.W. The Two Thousand Isles . Reprint 1835 edn. Asian Educational Services. Delhi 2003. Hideyuki Takahashi, Maldivian National Security –And the Threats of Mercenaries , The Round Table (London), No. 351, July 1999, pp. 433–444. Malten, Thomas: Malediven und Lakkadiven. Materialien zur Bibliographie der Atolle im Indischen Ozean. Beiträge zur Südasien-Forschung Südasien-Institut Universität Heidelberg, Nr. 87. Franz Steiner Verlag. Wiesbaden, 1983. Vilgon, Lars: Maldive and Minicoy Islands Bibliography with the Laccadive Islands. Published by the author. Stockholm, 1994. Djan Sauerborn, "The Archipelago State in Disarray: Internal External Battle for the Maldives" , Spotlight South Asia, Heidelberg, 2012, ISSN 2195-2787 Clarence Maloney , People of the Maldive Islands , Orient Black Swan, 2013 Xavier Romero-Frias , The Maldive Islanders : a study of the popular culture of an ancient ocean kingdom , NEI, 1999 Xavier Romero-Frias, Folk Tales of the Maldives , Nordic Institute of Asian Studies, 2012 Djan Sauerborn, The Perils of Rising Fundamentalism in the Maldives , International Relations and Security Network (ISN), Zürich, September 2013 Djan Sauerborn, Failing to Transition: Democratization under Stress in the Maldives , South Asia Democratic Forum (SADF), February 2015 External links [ edit ] Find more about 

Maldives 

at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Travel guide from Wikivoyage Official tourist information Presidents Office "Maldives" . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Maldives from UCB Libraries GovPubs Maldives at DMOZ Maldives from the BBC News Wikimedia Atlas of Maldives Key Development Forecasts for the Maldives from International Futures Constitution of the Republic of Maldives v t e Maldives articles History Museum Folklore Buddhism Koimala Dynasties Sultans 1952 republic referendum 1968 republic referendum 1988 coup d'état 2003 civil unrest Black Friday 2004 tsunami 2005 civil unrest Multi-party democracy 2011–12 political crisis Geography Atolls Channels Climate Islands Towns and villages Wildlife Baa atoll UNESCO biosphere reserve Politics Administrative divisions Cabinet Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights Religious freedom Irreligion LGBT LGBT history Judiciary Law enforcement Majlis (parliament) Military Political parties President Economy Economic aid Fishing Industries Rufiyaa (currency) Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport airports Society People Anthem Crime Cuisine Culture Demographics Education Emblem Flag Names Islam Language scripts Music Sports Outline Index Book Category Portal Articles related to the Maldives Geographic locale v t e Island-level constituencies of the Maldives Haa Alif Baarah Dhidhdhoo Filladhoo Hoarafushi Ihavandhoo Kelaa Maarandhoo Mulhadhoo Muraidhoo Thakandhoo Thuraakunu Uligan Utheemu Vashafaru Haa Dhaalu Finey Hanimaadhoo Hirimaradhoo Kulhudhuffushi Kumundhoo Kurinbi Makunudhoo Naivaadhoo Nellaidhoo Neykurendhoo Nolhivaram Nolhivaranfaru Vaikaradhoo Shaviyani Bileffahi Feevah Feydhoo Foakaidhoo Funadhoo Goidhoo Kanditheemu Komandoo Lhaimagu Maaungoodhoo Maroshi Milandhoo Narudhoo Noomaraa Noonu Foddhoo Henbandhoo Holhudhoo Kendhikolhudhoo Kudafaree Landhoo Lhohi Maafaru Maalhendhoo Magoodhoo Manadhoo Miladhoo Velidhoo Raa Alifushi Angolhitheemu Dhuvaafaru Fainu Hulhudhuffaaru Inguraidhoo Innamaadhoo Kinolhas Maakurathu Maduvvaree Meedhoo Rashgetheemu Rasmaadhoo Ungoofaaru Vaadhoo Baa Dharavandhoo Dhonfanu Eydhafushi Fehendhoo Fulhadhoo Goidhoo Hithaadhoo Kamadhoo Kendhoo Kihaadhoo Kudarikilu Maalhos Thulhaadhoo Lhaviyani Hinnavaru Kurendhoo Naifaru Olhuvelifushi Kaafu Dhiffushi Gaafaru Gulhi Guraidhoo Himmafushi Huraa Kaashidhoo Maafushi Thulusdhoo Alif Alif Bodufulhadhoo Feridhoo Himandhoo Maalhos Mathiveri Rasdhoo Thoddoo Ukulhas Alif Dhaalu Dhangethi Dhigurah Didhdhoo Fenfushi Hangnaameedhoo Kunburudhoo Maamingili Mahibadhoo Mandhoo Omadhoo Vaavu Felidhoo Fulidhoo Keyodhoo Rakeedhoo Thinadhoo Meemu Dhiggaru Kolhufushi Maduvvaree Mulah Muli Naalaafushi Raimmandhoo Veyvah Faafu Bileddhoo Dharanboodhoo Feeali Magoodhoo Nilandhoo Dhaalu Bandidhoo Hulhudheli Kudahuvadhoo Maaenboodhoo Meedhoo Rinbudhoo Kolhumadulu (Thaa) Burunee Dhiyamingili Gaadhiffushi Guraidhoo Hirilandhoo Kandoodhoo Kinbidhoo Madifushi Omadhoo Thimarafushi Vandhoo Veymandoo Vilufushi Laamu Dhanbidhoo Fonadhoo Gaadhoo Gan Hithadhoo Isdhoo Kalhaidhoo Kunahandhoo Maabaidhoo Maamendhoo Maavah Mundoo Gaafu Alif Dhaandhoo Dhevvadhoo Gemanafushi Kanduhulhudhoo Kolamaafushi Kondey Maamendhoo Nilandhoo Vilingili Gaafu Dhaalu Fares-Maathodaa Fiyoaree Gaddhoo Hoandeddhoo Madaveli Nadellaa Rathafandhoo Thinadhoo Vaadhoo Gnaviyani Fuvammulah Dhadimagu Dhiguvaandu Dhoondigan Funaadu Hoadhadu Maadhadu Maalegan Miskiymagu The capitals of each atoll are in bold . This list excludes first-level administrative divisions, Malé and Addu cities. v t e First-level administrative divisions of the Maldives Atolls Haa Alif Haa Dhaalu Shaviyani Noonu Raa Baa Lhaviyani Kaafu Alif Alif Alif Dhaal Vaavu Meemu Faafu Dhaalu Thaa Laamu Gaafu Alif Gaafu Dhaalu Gnaviyani Cities Malé Addu v t e Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean Africa Comoros Djibouti Egypt Eritrea France Mayotte Réunion Kenya Madagascar Mauritius Mozambique Rodrigues (Mauritius) Seychelles Somalia South Africa Sudan Tanzania Zanzibar , Tanzania Asia Bahrain Bangladesh British Indian Ocean Territory Chagos Archipelago - United Kingdom Christmas Island (Australia) Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia) India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Maldives Myanmar Oman Pakistan Qatar Saudi Arabia Sri Lanka Thailand Timor-Leste United Arab Emirates Yemen Other Antarctica Australian Antarctic Territory French Southern and Antarctic Lands Heard Island and McDonald Islands Australia v t e Countries bordering the Arabian Sea India Iran Maldives Oman Pakistan Somalia Yemen v t e Countries and dependencies of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand East Timor (Timor-Leste) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Nagorno-Karabakh Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and special 

administrative regions Australia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands China Hong Kong Macau United Kingdom Akrotiri and Dhekelia British Indian Ocean Territory International membership v t e Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) Members Afghanistan Albania Algeria Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Benin Burkina Faso Brunei Cameroon Chad Comoros Djibouti Egypt Gabon Gambia Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Indonesia Iran Iraq Ivory Coast Jordan Kuwait Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Lebanon Libya Maldives Malaysia Mali Mauritania Morocco Mozambique Niger Nigeria Oman Pakistan Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Senegal Sierra Leone Somalia Sudan Suriname Tajikistan Turkey Tunisia Togo Turkmenistan Uganda Uzbekistan United Arab Emirates Yemen Suspended Syria Observers Countries 

and territories Bosnia and Herzegovina Central African Republic Northern Cyprus 1 Russia Thailand Muslim 

communities Moro National Liberation Front International 

organizations Economic Cooperation Organization African Union Arab League Non-Aligned Movement United Nations 1 As the "Turkish Cypriot State". v t e South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Agreements South Asian Free Trade Area Summits Dhaka 1985 Bengaluru 1986 Kathmandu 1987 Islamabad 1988 Malé 1990 Colombo 1991 Dhaka 1993 New Delhi 1995 Malé 1997 Colombo 1998 Kathmandu 2002 Islamabad 2004 Dhaka 2005 New Delhi 2007 Colombo 2007 Thimphu 2010 Addu 2011 Kathmandu 2014 19th SAARC summit Members Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Observers Australia China European Union Iran Japan Mauritius Myanmar South Korea United States Guests South Africa Russia Related Article(s) SAARC satellite v t e World Trade Organization System Accession and membership Appellate Body Dispute Settlement Body International Trade Centre Chronology of key events Issues Criticism Doha Development Round Singapore issues Quota Elimination Peace Clause Agreements General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Agriculture Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures Technical Barriers to Trade Trade Related Investment Measures Trade in Services Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights Government Procurement Information Technology Marrakech Agreement Doha Declaration Bali Package Ministerial 

Conferences 1st (1996) 2nd (1998) 3rd (1999) 4th (2001) 5th (2003) 6th (2005) 7th (2009) 8th (2011) 9th (2013) 10th (2015) People Roberto Azevêdo ( Director-General ) Pascal Lamy (Former Director-General) Supachai Panitchpakdi (Former Director-General) Deputy Directors-General: Yonov Frederick Agah Karl Brauner David Shark Yi Xiaozhun Former: Alejandro Jara Valentine Rugwabiza Harsha Singh Rufus Yerxa Members Afghanistan Albania Algeria Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belize Benin Bolivia Botswana Brazil Brunei Burkina Faso Burma Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Cuba Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador European Union ¹ Fiji Gabon The Gambia Georgia Ghana Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hong Kong ² Iceland India Indonesia Israel Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lesotho Liberia Liechtenstein Macau ² Macedonia Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nepal New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Norway Oman Pakistan Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Qatar Russia Rwanda St. Kitts and Nevis St. Lucia St. Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa Saudi Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Solomon Islands South Africa Sri Lanka Suriname Swaziland Switzerland Tajikistan Taiwan ³ Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United States Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe 

1. All twenty-eight member states of the European Union are also members of the WTO in their own right: Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden United Kingdom 



2. Special administrative regions of the People's Republic of China , participates as "Hong Kong, China" and "Macao China". 

3. Officially the Republic of China, participates as " Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu ", and "Chinese Taipei" in short. v t e Non-Aligned Movement Members List of members of Non-Aligned Movement India and the Non-Aligned Movement Yugoslavia and the Non-Aligned Movement Egypt and the Non-Aligned Movement Structure Organizations NAM News Network Principles Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Summits Bandung Conference Non-Aligned Foreign Ministers Conference 16th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement People Josip Broz Tito Sukarno Gamal Abdel Nasser Houari Boumediene Fidel Castro Nelson Mandela Mohamed Morsi v t e Portuguese overseas empire North Africa 

15th century 1415–1640 Ceuta 1458–1550 Alcácer Ceguer (El Qsar es Seghir) 1471–1550 Arzila (Asilah) 1471–1662 Tangier 1485–1550 Mazagan (El Jadida) 1487–16th century Ouadane 1488–1541 Safim (Safi) 1489 Graciosa 

16th century 1505–1541 Santa Cruz do Cabo de Gué (Agadir) 1506–1525 Mogador (Essaouira) 1506–1525 Aguz (Souira Guedima) 1506–1769 Mazagan (El Jadida) 1513–1541 Azamor (Azemmour) 1515–1541 São João da Mamora (Mehdya) 1577–1589 Arzila (Asilah) Sub-Saharan Africa 

15th century 1455–1633 Anguim 1462–1975 Cape Verde 1470–1975 São Tomé 1 1471–1975 Príncipe 1 1474–1778 Annobón 1478–1778 Fernando Poo (Bioko) 1482–1637 Elmina (São Jorge da Mina) 1482–1642 Portuguese Gold Coast 1508–1547 2 Madagascar 3 1498–1540 Mascarene Islands 

16th century 1500–1630 Malindi 1501–1975 Portuguese Mozambique 1502–1659 Saint Helena 1503–1698 Zanzibar 1505–1512 Quíloa (Kilwa) 1506–1511 Socotra 1557–1578 Accra 1575–1975 Portuguese Angola 1588–1974 Cacheu 4 1593–1698 Mombassa (Mombasa) 

17th century 1645–1888 Ziguinchor 1680–1961 São João Baptista de Ajudá 1687–1974 Bissau 4 

18th century 1728–1729 Mombassa (Mombasa) 1753–1975 Portuguese São Tomé and Príncipe 

19th century 1879–1974 Portuguese Guinea 1885–1975 Portuguese Congo 1 Part of São Tomé and Príncipe from 1753. 2 Or 1600. 3 A factory ( Anosy Region ) and small temporary coastal bases. 4 Part of Portuguese Guinea from 1879. Southwest Asia 

16th century 1506–1615 Gamru (Bandar Abbas) 1507–1643 Sohar 1515–1622 Hormuz (Ormus) 1515–1648 Quriyat 1515–? Qalhat 1515–1650 Muscat 1515?–? Barka 1515–1633? Julfar (Ras al-Khaimah) 1521–1602 Bahrain ( Muharraq • Manama ) 1521–1529? Qatif 1521?–1551? Tarut Island 1550–1551 Qatif 1588–1648 Matrah 

17th century 1620–? Khor Fakkan 1621?–? As Sib 1621–1622 Qeshm 1623–? Khasab 1623–? Libedia 1624–? Kalba 1624–? Madha 1624–1648 Dibba Al-Hisn 1624?–? Bandar-e Kong Indian subcontinent 

15th century 1498–1545 Laccadive Islands 

(Lakshadweep) 

16th century 

Portuguese India • 1500–1663 Cochim (Kochi) • 1501–1663 Cannanore (Kannur) • 1502–1658 

1659–1661 Quilon 

(Coulão / Kollam) • 1502–1661 Pallipuram (Cochin de Cima) • 1507–1657 Negapatam (Nagapatnam) • 1510–1961 Goa • 1512–1525 

1750 Calicut 

(Kozhikode) • 1518–1619 Portuguese Paliacate outpost (Pulicat) • 1521–1740 Chaul (Portuguese India) • 1523–1662 Mylapore • 1528–1666 Chittagong 

(Porto Grande De Bengala) • 1531–1571 Chaul • 1531–1571 Chalé • 1534–1601 Salsette Island • 1534–1661 Bombay (Mumbai) • 1535 Ponnani • 1535–1739 Baçaím (Vasai-Virar) • 1536–1662 Cranganore (Kodungallur) • 1540–1612 Surat • 1548–1658 Tuticorin (Thoothukudi) • 1559–1961 Daman and Diu • 1568–1659 Mangalore (Portuguese India) • 1579–1632 Hugli • 1598–1610 Masulipatnam (Machilipatnam) 1518–1521 Maldives 1518–1658 Portuguese Ceylon (Sri Lanka) 1558–1573 Maldives 

17th century 

Portuguese India • 1687–1749 Mylapore 

18th century 

Portuguese India • 1779–1954 Dadra and Nagar Haveli East Asia and Oceania 

16th century 1511–1641 Portuguese Malacca 1512–1621 Maluku • 1522–1575 Ternate • 1576–1605 Ambon • 1578–1650 Tidore 1512–1665 Makassar 1537–1999 Macau 1571–1639 Decima (Dejima / Nagasaki) 

17th century 1642–1975 Portuguese Timor ( East Timor ) 1 

19th century 

Portuguese Macau • 1864–1999 Coloane • 1851–1999 Taipa • 1890–1999 Ilha Verde 

20th century 

Portuguese Macau • 1938–1941 Lapa and Montanha (Hengqin) 1 1975 is the year of East Timor's Declaration of Independence and subsequent invasion by Indonesia. In 2002, East Timor's independence was fully recognized. North America and the North Atlantic Ocean 

15th century 1420 Madeira 1432 Azores 

16th century 1500–1579? Terra Nova (Newfoundland) 1500–1579? Labrador 1516–1579? Nova Scotia Central and South America 

16th century 1500–1822 Brazil • 1534–1549 Captaincy Colonies of Brazil • 1549–1572 Brazil • 1572–1578 Bahia • 1572–1578 Rio de Janeiro • 1578–1607 Brazil • 1621–1815 Brazil 1536–1620 Barbados 

17th century 1621–1751 Maranhão 1680–1777 Nova Colónia do Sacramento 

18th century 1751–1772 Grão-Pará and Maranhão 1772–1775 Grão-Pará and Rio Negro 1772–1775 Maranhão and Piauí 

19th century 1808–1822 Cisplatina (Uruguay) 1809–1817 Portuguese Guiana (Amapá) 1822 Upper Peru (Bolivia) Coats of arms of Portuguese colonies Evolution of the Portuguese Empire Portuguese colonial architecture Portuguese colonialism in Indonesia Portuguese colonization of the Americas Theory of the Portuguese discovery of Australia Geography portal Asia portal South Asia portal SAARC portal Maldives portal Islands portal Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF : 173440507 LCCN : n81139903 GND : 4037212-1 BNF : cb11932321r (data) NDL : 00567502 

Coordinates : 3°12′N 73°13′E ﻿ / ﻿ 3.20°N 73.22°E ﻿ / 3.20; 73.22 (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.log.warn("Gadget \"teahouse\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"ReferenceTooltips\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"featured-articles-links\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");}); Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maldives oldid=745288171 " Categories : Maldives Archipelagoes of the Indian Ocean Countries in Asia Island countries Islands of the Indian Ocean Landforms of South Asia Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Member states of the United Nations Muslim-majority countries Republics Small Island Developing States South Asian countries States and territories established in 1965 1965 establishments in Asia Hidden categories: CS1 errors: dates All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2016 Use British English from February 2012 Use dmy dates from May 2016 Articles containing Dhivehi-language text Articles including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2013 All articles with links needing disambiguation Articles with links needing disambiguation from September 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles needing additional references from October 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010 Articles needing additional references from April 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013 Articles needing additional references from October 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2014 Articles with DMOZ links Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Coordinates on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikivoyage Languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Cebuano Čeština ChiShona ChiTumbuka Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Лезги Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lumbaart Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ पालि پنجابی پښتو Patois Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sámegiella संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردیی ناوەندی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча/tatarça తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Livvinkarjala Edit links This page was last modified on 20 October 2016, at 08:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.loader.load(["ext.cite.a11y","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.action.view.postEdit","site","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.searchSuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.ReferenceTooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.DRN-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.refToolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.visualEditor.targetLoader","ext.eventLogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaEvents","ext.navigationTiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.centralNotice.geoIP","ext.centralNotice.startUp"]);}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set( { "wgPageParseReport": { "limitreport": { "cputime": "1.556", "walltime": "1.831", "ppvisitednodes": { "value": 15512, "limit": 1000000 }, "ppgeneratednodes": { "value": 0, "limit": 1500000 }, "postexpandincludesize": { "value": 995189, "limit": 2097152 }, "templateargumentsize": { "value": 388285, "limit": 2097152 }, "expansiondepth": { "value": 20, "limit": 40 }, "expensivefunctioncount": { "value": 45, "limit": 500 }, "entityaccesscount": { "value": 1, "limit": 400 }, "timingprofile": [ "100.00% 1354.844 1 -total", " 44.37% 601.097 3 Template:Navboxes", " 31.46% 426.300 2 Template:Reflist", " 14.98% 202.997 55 Template:Cite_web", " 10.69% 144.862 12 Template:Navbox", " 9.30% 126.043 1 Template:Portuguese_overseas_empire", " 8.76% 118.623 1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups", " 6.51% 88.170 1 Template:Infobox_country", " 6.50% 88.108 8 Template:Fix", " 5.64% 76.427 5 Template:Citation_needed" ] }, "scribunto": { "limitreport-timeusage": { "value": "0.645", "limit": "10.000" }, "limitreport-memusage": { "value": 10712900, "limit": 52428800 } }, "cachereport": { "origin": "mw1255", "timestamp": "20161020152717", "ttl": 2592000, "transientcontent": false } } } );}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgBackendResponseTime":90,"wgHostname":"mw1237"});});