Whiskey Rebellion - Wikipedia document.documentElement.className = document.documentElement.className.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" ); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgCanonicalNamespace":"","wgCanonicalSpecialPageName":false,"wgNamespaceNumber":0,"wgPageName":"Whiskey_Rebellion","wgTitle":"Whiskey Rebellion","wgCurRevisionId":740336390,"wgRevisionId":740336390,"wgArticleId":143541,"wgIsArticle":true,"wgIsRedirect":false,"wgAction":"view","wgUserName":null,"wgUserGroups":["*"],"wgCategories":["Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism","Use dmy dates from February 2014","Pennsylvania state historical marker significations","Whiskey Rebellion","3rd United States Congress","18th-century rebellions","1790s in the United States","1794 in the United States","Conflicts in 1794","History of Pennsylvania","Presidency of George Washington","Rebellions in the United States","Tax resistance in the United States","Alcohol in the United States"],"wgBreakFrames":false,"wgPageContentLanguage":"en","wgPageContentModel":"wikitext","wgSeparatorTransformTable":["",""],"wgDigitTransformTable":["",""],"wgDefaultDateFormat":"dmy","wgMonthNames":["","January","February","March","April","May","June","July","August","September","October","November","December"],"wgMonthNamesShort":["","Jan","Feb","Mar","Apr","May","Jun","Jul","Aug","Sep","Oct","Nov","Dec"],"wgRelevantPageName":"Whiskey_Rebellion","wgRelevantArticleId":143541,"wgRequestId":"WAlojQpAMFgAAIJQCL4AAABU","wgIsProbablyEditable":false,"wgRestrictionEdit":["autoconfirmed"],"wgRestrictionMove":[],"wgWikiEditorEnabledModules":{"toolbar":true,"dialogs":true,"preview":false,"publish":false},"wgBetaFeaturesFeatures":[],"wgMediaViewerOnClick":true,"wgMediaViewerEnabledByDefault":true,"wgVisualEditor":{"pageLanguageCode":"en","pageLanguageDir":"ltr","usePageImages":true,"usePageDescriptions":true},"wgPreferredVariant":"en","wgMFDisplayWikibaseDescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgRelatedArticles":null,"wgRelatedArticlesUseCirrusSearch":true,"wgRelatedArticlesOnlyUseCirrusSearch":false,"wgULSCurrentAutonym":"English","wgNoticeProject":"wikipedia","wgCentralNoticeCookiesToDelete":[],"wgCentralNoticeCategoriesUsingLegacy":["Fundraising","fundraising"],"wgCategoryTreePageCategoryOptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgFlaggedRevsParams":{"tags":{"status":{"levels":1,"quality":2,"pristine":3}}},"wgStableRevisionId":null,"wgWikibaseItemId":"Q377542","wgCentralAuthMobileDomain":false,"wgVisualEditorToolbarScrollOffset":0,"wgEditSubmitButtonLabelPublish":false});mw.loader.state({"ext.globalCssJs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","user.cssprefs":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"loading","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediaBadges":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonPrint":"ready","mediawiki.sectionAnchor":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.user":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.options@0j3lz3q",function($,jQuery,require,module){mw.user.options.set({"variant":"en"});});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@1dqfd7l",function ( $, jQuery, require, module ) { mw.user.tokens.set({"editToken":"+\\","patrolToken":"+\\","watchToken":"+\\","csrfToken":"+\\"});/*@nomin*/; });mw.loader.load(["mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.legacy.wikibits","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.init","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","skins.vector.js"]);}); Whiskey Rebellion From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation , search Whiskey Rebellion 

George Washington reviews the troops near Fort Cumberland , Maryland, before their march to suppress the Whiskey Rebellion in western Pennsylvania. Date 1791–1794 Location primarily Western Pennsylvania Result 

Government victory Armed resistance eliminated Minor tax evasion Belligerents Frontier tax protesters United States Commanders and leaders Unknown, possibly none George Washington Casualties and losses 3–4 killed 

170 captured [1] None killed in action; About 12 died from illness or in accidents [2] 2 civilians accidentally killed by government troops v t e Whiskey Rebellion Johnson Incident Battle of Bower Hill Pittsburgh Expedition Western Pennsylvania Expedition Hagerstown Riot 

The Whiskey Rebellion , also known as the Whiskey Insurrection , was a tax protest in the United States beginning in 1791, during the presidency of George Washington . The so-called "whiskey tax" was the first tax imposed on a domestic product by the newly formed federal government. It became law in 1791, and was intended to generate revenue to help reduce the national debt. [3] Although the tax applied to all distilled spirits, whiskey was by far the most popular distilled beverage in the 18th-century U.S. Because of this, the excise became widely known as a "whiskey tax". The new excise was a part of U.S. treasury secretary Alexander Hamilton 's program to pay war debt incurred during the American Revolutionary War . 

The tax was resisted by farmers in the western frontier regions who were long accustomed to distilling their surplus grain and corn into whiskey. In these regions, whiskey was sufficiently popular that it often served as a medium of exchange . Many of the resisters were war veterans who believed that they were fighting for the principles of the American Revolution , in particular against taxation without local representation, while the U.S. federal government maintained the taxes were the legal expression of the taxation powers of Congress . 

Throughout counties in Western Pennsylvania , protesters used violence and intimidation to prevent federal officials from collecting the tax. Resistance came to a climax in July 1794, when a U.S. marshal arrived in western Pennsylvania to serve writs to distillers who had not paid the excise. The alarm was raised, and more than 500 armed men attacked the fortified home of tax inspector General John Neville . Washington responded by sending peace commissioners to western Pennsylvania to negotiate with the rebels, while at the same time calling on governors to send a militia force to enforce the tax. With 13,000 militiamen provided by the governors of Virginia , Maryland , New Jersey , and Pennsylvania , Washington rode at the head of an army to suppress the insurgency. The rebels all went home before the arrival of the army, and there was no confrontation. About 20 men were arrested, but all were later acquitted or pardoned. Most distillers in nearby Kentucky were found to be all but impossible to tax; in the next six years, over 175 distillers from Kentucky were convicted of violating the tax law. [4] Numerous examples of resistance are recorded in court documents and newspaper accounts. [5] 

The Whiskey Rebellion demonstrated that the new national government had the will and the ability to suppress violent resistance to its laws. The whiskey excise remained difficult to collect, however. The events contributed to the formation of political parties in the United States, a process already underway. The whiskey tax was repealed after Thomas Jefferson 's Republican Party , which opposed Hamilton's Federalist Party , came to power in 1801. 

Contents 1 Whiskey tax 2 Western grievances 3 Resistance 4 Insurrection 4.1 Battle of Bower Hill 4.2 March on Pittsburgh 4.3 Meeting at Whiskey Point 4.4 Federal response 4.4.1 Negotiations 4.4.2 Militia expedition 5 Legacy 5.1 In popular culture 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links 

Whiskey tax Alexander Hamilton in a 1792 portrait by John Trumbull 

A new U.S. federal government began operating in 1789, following the ratification of the United States Constitution . The previous central government under the Articles of Confederation had been unable to levy taxes; it had borrowed money to meet expenses and fund the Revolution , accumulating $54 million in debt. The states had amassed an additional $25 million in debt. [6] Alexander Hamilton , the first Secretary of the Treasury , sought to use this debt to create a financial system that would promote American prosperity and national unity. In his Report on Public Credit , he urged Congress to consolidate the state and national debts into a single debt that would be funded by the federal government. Congress approved these measures in June and July 1790. [7] 

A source of government revenue was needed to pay the respectable amount due of the previous bond holders to whom the debt was owed. By December 1790, Hamilton believed import duties, which were the government's primary source of revenue, had been raised as high as was feasible. [8] He therefore promoted passage of an excise tax on domestically produced distilled spirits . This was to be the first tax levied by the national government on a domestic product, [9] and because whiskey was by far the most popular distilled beverage in late 18th-century America, the excise became known as the "whiskey tax." Although taxes were politically unpopular, Hamilton believed that the whiskey excise was a luxury tax that would be the least objectionable tax the government could levy. [10] In this, he had the support of some social reformers, who hoped a " sin tax " would raise public awareness about the harmful effects of alcohol. [11] The whiskey excise act, sometimes known as the "Whiskey Act", became law in March 1791. [12] George Washington defined the revenue districts, appointed the revenue supervisors and inspectors, and set their pay in November 1791. [13] Western grievances 

The whiskey excise was immediately controversial, with many people on the frontier arguing the tax unfairly targeted westerners. [14] Whiskey was a popular drink, and farmers often supplemented their incomes by operating small stills . [15] Farmers living west of the Appalachian Mountains distilled their excess grain into whiskey, which was easier and more profitable to transport over the mountains than the more cumbersome grain. A whiskey tax would make western farmers less competitive with eastern grain producers. [16] Additionally, cash was always in short supply on the frontier, so whiskey often served as a medium of exchange . For poorer people who were paid in whiskey, the excise was essentially an income tax that wealthier easterners did not pay. [17] 

The main objection to the whiskey tax was that it was taxation without (local) representation, exactly what they'd just fought the Revolutionary War to stop. Many tax resisters were veterans. In the Western view, they were fighting for freedom, resisting the newly emerging central state. Furthermore, they did not understand why they should pay other people's debts. Some states had repaid their war debt. The Federalists were buying support from indebted states with their policy of assumption . 

Small-scale farmers also protested that Hamilton's excise effectively gave unfair tax breaks to large distillers, most of whom were based in the east. There were two methods of paying the whiskey excise: paying a flat fee or paying by the gallon. Large distillers produced whiskey in volume and could afford the flat fee. The more efficient they became, the less tax per gallon they would pay (as low as 6 cents according to Hamilton). Western farmers who owned small stills did not usually operate them year-round at full capacity, so they ended up paying a higher tax per gallon (9 cents), which made them less competitive. [18] The regressive nature of the tax was further compounded by an additional factor – whiskey sold for considerably less on the cash-poor Western frontier compared to the wealthier and more populous East, meaning that even if all distillers had been required to pay the same amount of tax per gallon, the small-scale frontier distillers would have still had to remit a considerably larger proportion of theIr product's value compared to larger Eastern distillers. Small-scale distillers believed Hamilton deliberately designed the tax to ruin them and promote big business, a view endorsed by some historians. [19] However, historian Thomas Slaughter argued that a "conspiracy of this sort is difficult to document". [20] Whether by design or not, large distillers recognized the advantage the excise gave them, and they supported the tax. [21] 

In addition to the whiskey tax, westerners had a number of other grievances with the national government. Chief among these was the perception that the government was not adequately protecting the western frontier: the Northwest Indian War was going badly for the United States, with major losses in 1791. Furthermore, westerners were prohibited by Spain (which then owned Louisiana ) from using the Mississippi River for commercial navigation. Until these issues were addressed, westerners felt the government was ignoring their security and economic welfare. Adding the whiskey excise to these existing grievances only increased tensions on the frontier. [22] Resistance 

Many residents of the western frontier petitioned against passage of the whiskey excise. When that failed, some western Pennsylvanians organized extralegal conventions to advocate repeal of the law. [23] Opposition to the tax was particularly prevalent in four southwestern counties: Allegheny , Fayette , Washington , and Westmoreland . [24] A preliminary meeting held on 27 July 1791, at Redstone Old Fort in Fayette County, called for the selection of delegates to a more formal assembly, which convened in Pittsburgh in early September 1791. The Pittsburgh convention was dominated by moderates such as Hugh Henry Brackenridge , who hoped to prevent the outbreak of violence. [25] The convention sent a petition for redress of grievances to the Pennsylvania Assembly and the U.S House of Representatives , both located in Philadelphia . [26] As a result of this and other petitions, the excise law was modified in May 1792. Changes included a 1-cent reduction in the tax that was advocated by William Findley , a congressman from western Pennsylvania, but the new excise law was still unsatisfactory to many westerners. [27] "Famous Whiskey Insurrection in Pennsylvania", an 1880 illustration of a tarred and feathered tax collector being made to ride the rail 

Appeals to nonviolent resistance were unsuccessful. On 11 September 1791, a recently appointed tax collector named Robert Johnson was tarred and feathered by a disguised gang in Washington County. [28] A man sent by officials to serve court warrants to Johnson's attackers was whipped, tarred, and feathered. [29] Because of these and other violent attacks, the tax went uncollected in 1791 and early 1792. [30] The attackers modeled their actions on the protests of the American Revolution . Supporters of the excise argued there was a difference between taxation without representation in colonial America, and a tax laid by the elected representatives of the American people. [31] 

Although older accounts of the Whiskey Rebellion portrayed it as being confined to western Pennsylvania, there was opposition to the whiskey tax in the western counties of every other state in Appalachia (Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia). [32] The whiskey tax went uncollected throughout the frontier state of Kentucky, where no one could be convinced to enforce the law or prosecute evaders. [33] [34] In 1792, Hamilton advocated military action to suppress violent resistance in western North Carolina, but Attorney General Edmund Randolph argued there was insufficient evidence to legally justify such a reaction. [35] 

In August 1792, a second convention was held in Pittsburgh to discuss resistance to the whiskey tax. This meeting was more radical than the first convention; moderates such as Brackenridge and Findley were not in attendance. One moderate who did attend—to his later regret—was Albert Gallatin , a future secretary of the treasury. [36] A militant group known as the Mingo Creek Association dominated the convention and issued radical demands. As some of them had done in the American Revolution, they raised liberty poles , formed committees of correspondence , and took control of the local militia. They created an extralegal court and discouraged lawsuits for debt collection and foreclosures. [37] 

Hamilton regarded the second Pittsburgh convention as a serious threat to the operation of the laws of the federal government. In September 1792, he sent Pennsylvania tax official George Clymer to western Pennsylvania to investigate. Clymer's clumsy attempt at traveling in disguise, and his efforts to intimidate local officials, only increased tensions. His somewhat exaggerated report would greatly influence the decisions made by the Washington administration. [38] Washington and Hamilton viewed resistance to federal laws in Pennsylvania as particularly embarrassing, since the national capital was then located in the same state. On his own initiative, Hamilton drafted a presidential proclamation denouncing resistance to the excise laws and submitted it to Attorney General Randolph, who toned down some of the language. Washington signed the proclamation on September 15, 1792. It was published as a broadside and printed in many newspapers. [39] 

The federal tax inspector for western Pennsylvania, General John Neville , was determined to enforce the excise law. [40] Neville, a prominent politician and wealthy planter, was also a large-scale distiller. He had initially opposed the whiskey tax, but subsequently changed his mind, a reversal that angered some western Pennsylvanians. [41] In August 1792, Neville rented a room in Pittsburgh for his tax office, but the landlord turned him out after being threatened with violence by the Mingo Creek Association. [42] From this point on, tax collectors were not the only people targeted in Pennsylvania: those who cooperated with federal tax officials also faced harassment. Anonymous notes and newspaper articles signed by "Tom the Tinker " threatened those who complied with the whiskey tax. [43] Those who failed to heed the warnings might have their barns burned or their stills destroyed. [44] 

Resistance to the excise tax continued through 1793 in the frontier counties of Appalachia. Opposition remained especially strident in western Pennsylvania. [45] In June, Neville was burned in effigy by a crowd of about 100 people in Washington County. [46] On the night of 22 November 1793, men broke into the home of tax collector Benjamin Wells in Fayette County. Wells was, like Neville, one of the wealthier men in the region. [47] At gunpoint, the intruders forced Wells to surrender his commission. [45] President Washington offered a reward for the arrest of the assailants, to no avail. [48] Insurrection In his 1796 book, Congressman William Findley argued that Alexander Hamilton had deliberately provoked the Whiskey Rebellion. 

The resistance came to a climax in 1794. In May of that year, federal district attorney William Rawle issued subpoenas for more than 60 distillers in Pennsylvania who had not paid the excise tax. [49] Under the law then in effect, distillers who received these writs would be obligated to travel to Philadelphia to appear in federal court. For farmers on the western frontier, such a journey was expensive, time-consuming, and beyond their means. [50] At the urging of William Findley, Congress modified this law on 5 June 1794, allowing excise trials to be held in local state courts. [51] But by that time, U.S. marshal David Lenox had already been sent to serve the writs summoning delinquent distillers to Philadelphia. Attorney General William Bradford later maintained that the writs were meant to compel compliance with the law, and that the government did not actually intend to hold trials in Philadelphia. [52] 

The timing of these events would later prove to be controversial. In his book on the insurrection, Findley—a bitter political foe of Hamilton—maintained that the treasury secretary had deliberately provoked the uprising by issuing the subpoenas just before the law was made less onerous. [53] In 1963, historian Jacob Cooke, an editor of Hamilton's papers, regarded this charge as "preposterous", calling it a " conspiracy thesis " that overstated Hamilton's control of the federal government. [54] In 1986, historian Thomas Slaughter argued that the outbreak of the insurrection at this moment was due to "a string of ironic coincidences", although "the question about motives must always remain". [55] In 2006, William Hogeland argued that Hamilton, Bradford, and Rawle intentionally pursued a course of action that would provoke "the kind of violence that would justify federal military suppression". [56] According to Hogeland, Hamilton had been working towards this moment since the Newburgh Crisis in 1783, where he conceived of using military force to crush popular resistance to direct taxation, for the purpose of promoting national unity and enriching the creditor class at the expense of common taxpayers. [57] The historian S. E. Morison believed Hamilton, in general, wished to enforce the excise law "more as a measure of social discipline than as a source of revenue..." [58] Battle of Bower Hill 

Federal Marshal Lenox delivered most of the writs without incident. On 15 July, he was joined on his rounds by General Neville, who had offered to act as his guide in Allegheny County. [59] That evening, warning shots were fired at the men at the Miller farm , about 10 mi (16 km) south of Pittsburgh. Neville returned home, while Lenox retreated to Pittsburgh. [60] 

On 16 July, at least 30 Mingo Creek militiamen surrounded Neville's fortified home, Bower Hill. [61] They demanded the surrender of the federal marshal, whom they believed to be inside. Neville responded by firing a gunshot that mortally wounded Oliver Miller, one of the "rebels". [62] The rebels opened fire, but were unable to dislodge Neville, who had his slaves help to defend the house. [63] The rebels retreated to nearby Couch's Fort to gather reinforcements. 

The next day, 17 July, the rebels returned to Bower Hill. Their force had swelled to nearly 600 men, now commanded by Major James McFarlane, a veteran of the Revolutionary War. [64] Neville had also received reinforcements: 10 U.S. Army soldiers from Pittsburgh under the command of Major Abraham Kirkpatrick, a brother-in-law of Neville's wife. [65] Before the rebel force arrived, Kirkpatrick had Neville leave the house and hide in a nearby ravine. David Lenox and General Neville's son, Presley Neville , also returned to the area, though they could not get into the house and were captured by the rebels. [66] 

Following some fruitless negotiations, the women and children were allowed to leave the house, and then both sides began firing. After about an hour, McFarlane called a cease fire; according to some, a white flag had been waved in the house. As McFarlane stepped into the open, a shot rang out from the house, and he fell, mortally wounded. The enraged rebels then set fire to the house, including the slave quarters, and Kirkpatrick surrendered. [67] The number of casualties at Bower Hill is unclear; McFarlane and one or two other militiamen were killed; one U.S. soldier may have died from wounds received in the fight. [68] The rebels sent the U.S. soldiers away. Kirkpatrick, Lenox, and Presley Neville were kept as prisoners, but they later escaped. [69] March on Pittsburgh Portrait of Hugh Henry Brackenridge , a western opponent of the whiskey tax who tried to prevent violent resistance 

McFarlane was given a hero's funeral on July 18. His "murder", as the rebels saw it, further radicalized the countryside. [70] Moderates such as Brackenridge were hard-pressed to restrain the populace. Radical leaders such as David Bradford emerged, urging violent resistance. On 26 July, a group headed by Bradford robbed the U.S. mail as it left Pittsburgh, hoping to discover who in that town opposed them. Finding several letters that condemned the rebels, Bradford and his band called for a military assembly to meet at Braddock's Field , about 8 mi (13 km) east of Pittsburgh. [71] 

On 1 August, about 7,000 people gathered at Braddock's Field. [72] This would prove to be the largest gathering of protesters. [73] The crowd consisted primarily of poor people who owned no land. Most did not own whiskey stills. The furor over the whiskey excise had unleashed anger about other economic grievances. By this time, the victims of violence were often wealthy property owners who had no connection to the whiskey tax. [74] Some of the most radical protesters wanted to march on Pittsburgh, which they called " Sodom ", loot the homes of the wealthy, and then burn the town to the ground. [75] Others wanted to attack Fort Fayette . There was praise for the French Revolution , and of bringing the guillotine to America. David Bradford, it was said, was comparing himself to Robespierre , a leader of the French Reign of Terror . [76] 

At Braddock's Field, there was talk of declaring independence from the United States, and of joining with Spain or Great Britain. Radicals flew a specially designed flag that proclaimed their independence. The flag had six stripes, one for each county represented at the gathering: five Pennsylvania counties (Allegheny, Bedford , Fayette, Washington, and Westmoreland) and one Virginia county ( Ohio County ). [77] 

Pittsburgh citizens helped defuse the threat by banishing three men whose intercepted letters had given offense to the rebels, and by sending a delegation to Braddock's Field that expressed support for the gathering. [78] Brackenridge prevailed upon the crowd to limit the protest to a defiant march through the town. In Pittsburgh, only the barns of Major Kirkpatrick were torched. [79] Meeting at Whiskey Point Whiskey Point Pennsylvania Historical Marker signification Location Main Street between First Street Park Avenue 

Monongahela Coordinates 40°12′01″N 79°55′21″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.20015°N 79.92258°W ﻿ / 40.20015; -79.92258 PA marker dedicated 26 May 1949 [80] 

On 14 August, a convention of 226 whiskey rebels from the six counties was held at Parkison's Ferry (now known as Whiskey Point), present-day Monongahela . The convention considered resolutions, which were drafted by Brackenridge, Gallatin, David Bradford, and an eccentric preacher named Herman Husband , a delegate from Bedford County. Husband, a well-known local figure, was a radical champion of democracy who had taken part in the Regulator movement in North Carolina 25 years earlier. [81] The Parkison's Ferry convention also appointed a committee to meet with the peace commissioners who had been sent west by President Washington. [82] There, Gallatin presented an eloquent speech in favor of peace and against proposals from Bradford to further revolt. [80] Federal response 

President Washington, confronted with what appeared to be an armed insurrection in western Pennsylvania, proceeded cautiously. Although determined to maintain government authority, he did not want to alienate public opinion. He asked his cabinet for written opinions about how to deal with the crisis. The cabinet recommended the use of force, except for Secretary of State Edmund Randolph , who urged reconciliation. [83] Washington did both: he sent commissioners to meet with the rebels while raising a militia army. Washington privately doubted the commissioners could accomplish anything, and believed a military expedition would be needed to suppress further violence. [84] For this reason, historians have sometimes charged that the peace commission was sent only for the sake of appearances, and that the use of force was never in doubt. [85] Historians Stanley Elkins and Eric McKitrick argued that the military expedition was "itself a part of the reconciliation process", since a show of overwhelming force would make further violence less likely. [86] 

Meanwhile, Hamilton began publishing essays under the name of "Tully" in Philadelphia newspapers, denouncing mob violence in western Pennsylvania and advocating military action. Washington and Hamilton believed the Democratic-Republican Societies , which had been formed throughout the country, were the source of civic unrest. "Historians are not yet agreed on the exact role of the societies" in the Whiskey Rebellion, wrote historian Mark Spencer in 2003, "but there was a degree of overlap between society membership and the Whiskey Rebels". [87] 

Before troops could be raised, the Militia Act of 1792 required a justice of the United States Supreme Court to certify that law enforcement was beyond the control of local authorities. On 4 August 1794, Justice James Wilson delivered his opinion that western Pennsylvania was in a state of rebellion. [88] On 7 August, Washington issued a presidential proclamation announcing, with "the deepest regret", that the militia would be called out to suppress the rebellion. He commanded insurgents in western Pennsylvania to disperse by September 1. [89] Negotiations 

In early August 1794, Washington dispatched three commissioners, all of them Pennsylvanians, to the west: Attorney General William Bradford , Justice Jasper Yeates of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court , and Senator James Ross . Beginning on 21 August, the commissioners met with a committee of westerners that included Brackenridge and Gallatin. The government commissioners told the committee that it must unanimously agree to renounce violence and submit to U.S. laws, and that a popular referendum must be held to determine if the local people supported the decision. Those who agreed to these terms would be given amnesty from further prosecution. [90] 

The committee, divided between radicals and moderates, narrowly passed a resolution agreeing to submit to the government's terms. The popular referendum, which was held on 11 September, also produced mixed results. Some townships overwhelmingly supported submitting to U.S. law, but opposition to the government remained strong in areas where poor and landless people predominated. [91] The final report of the commissioners recommended the use of the military to enforce the laws. [92] The trend was towards submission, however, and westerners dispatched two representatives, William Findley and David Redick , to meet with Washington and to halt the progress of the oncoming army. Washington and Hamilton declined, arguing that violence was likely to reemerge if the army turned back. [91] Militia expedition 

Under the authority of the recently passed federal militia law, the state militias were called up by the governors of New Jersey, Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania. The federalized militia force of 12,950 men was a large army by American standards of the time, comparable to Washington's armies during the Revolution. [93] Because relatively few men volunteered for militia service, a draft was used to fill out the ranks. Draft evasion was widespread, and conscription efforts resulted in protests and riots, even in eastern areas. Three counties in eastern Virginia were the scenes of armed draft resistance. In Maryland, Governor Thomas Sim Lee sent 800 men to quash an antidraft riot in Hagerstown ; about 150 people were arrested. [94] Governor Henry Lee of Virginia commanded the federalized militia army. 

Liberty poles were raised in various places as the militia was recruited, worrying federal officials. A liberty pole was raised in Carlisle, Pennsylvania , on 11 September 1794. [95] When the federalized militia arrived in that town later that month, suspected pole-raisers were rounded up. Two civilians were killed in these operations. On 29 September, an unarmed boy was shot by an officer whose pistol accidentally fired. Two days later, a man was stabbed to death by a soldier while resisting arrest. President Washington ordered the arrest of the two soldiers and had them turned over to civilian authorities. A state judge determined the deaths had been accidental, and the soldiers were released. [96] 

In October 1794, Washington traveled west to review the progress of the military expedition. According to historian Joseph Ellis , this would be "the first and only time a sitting American president led troops in the field". [97] Jonathan Forman , who led the Third Infantry Regiment of New Jersey troops against the Whiskey Rebellion, [98] wrote about his encounter with Washington: "October 3d Marched early in the morning for Harrisburgh, where we arrived about 12 O'clock. About 1 O'Clock recd. information of the Presidents approach on which, I had the regiment paraded, timely for his reception, considerably to my satisfaction. Being afterwards invited to his quarters he made enquiry into the circumstances of the man [an incident between a militia man and an old soldier mentioned earlier in the journal] seemed satisfied with the information." [99] Washington met with the western representatives in Bedford, Pennsylvania , on October 9 before going to Fort Cumberland in Maryland to review the southern wing of the army. [100] Convinced the federalized militia would meet little resistance, he placed the army under the command of the governor of Virginia, Henry "Lighthorse Harry" Lee , a hero of the Revolutionary War. Washington returned to Philadelphia; Hamilton remained with the army as civilian adviser. [101] 

The insurrection collapsed as the army marched into western Pennsylvania in October 1794. Some of the most prominent leaders of the insurrection, like David Bradford, fled westward to safety. After an investigation, federal government officials arrested about 20 people and brought them back to Philadelphia for trial. [102] Eventually, a federal grand jury indicted 24 men for high treason . [103] Most of the accused had eluded capture, so only ten men stood trial for treason in federal court. [104] Of these, only Philip Wigle [nb 1] and John Mitchell were convicted. Wigle had beaten up a tax collector and burned his house; Mitchell was a simpleton who had been convinced by David Bradford to rob the U.S. mail. Both men were sentenced to death by hanging, but they were pardoned by President Washington. [105] Pennsylvania state courts were more successful in prosecuting lawbreakers, securing numerous convictions for assault and rioting. [106] Legacy 

The Washington administration's suppression of the Whiskey Rebellion met with widespread popular approval. [107] The episode demonstrated the new national government had the willingness and ability to suppress violent resistance to its laws. It was therefore viewed by the Washington administration as a success, a view that has generally been endorsed by historians. [108] The Washington administration and its supporters usually did not mention, however, that the whiskey excise remained difficult to collect, and that many westerners continued to refuse to pay the tax. [32] The events contributed to the formation of political parties in the United States, a process already underway. [109] The whiskey tax was repealed after Thomas Jefferson 's Republican Party , which opposed the Federalist Party of Hamilton and Washington, came to power in 1801. [110] 

The Rebellion raised the question of what kinds of protests were permissible under the new Constitution. Legal historian Christian G. Fritz argued, even after ratification of the Constitution, there was not yet a consensus about sovereignty in the United States. Federalists believed the government was sovereign because it had been established by the people, so radical protest actions, which were permissible during the American Revolution, were no longer legitimate. But the Whiskey Rebels and their defenders believed the Revolution had established the people as a "collective sovereign", and the people had the collective right to change or challenge the government through extraconstitutional means. [111] 

Historian Steven Boyd argued that the suppression of the Whiskey Rebellion prompted anti-Federalist westerners to finally accept the Constitution, and to seek change by voting for Republicans rather than resisting the government. Federalists, for their part, came to accept that the people could play a greater role in governance. Although Federalists would attempt to restrict speech critical of the government with the Alien and Sedition Acts in 1798, after the Whiskey Rebellion, says Boyd, Federalists no longer challenged the freedom of assembly and the right to petition . [112] In popular culture 

Soon after the Whiskey Rebellion, actress-playwright Susanna Rowson wrote a stage musical about the insurrection entitled "The Volunteers", with music by composer Alexander Reinagle . The play is now lost, but the songs survive, and suggest that Rowson's interpretation was pro-Federalist. The musical celebrated the militiamen who put down the rebellion, the "volunteers" of the title, as American heroes. [113] President Washington and Martha Washington attended a performance of the play in Philadelphia in January 1795. [114] 

In 1946, shortly before his death, W. C. Fields recorded a comedy track in Les Paul 's studio entitled "The Temperance Lecture" for the album W. C. Fields... His Only Recording Plus 8 Songs by Mae West . The bit discussed Washington and his role in putting down the Whiskey Rebellion, and Fields wondered aloud whether "George put down a little of the vile stuff too." The track was sampled on The Calico Wall's 1967 psychedelic rock single "Flight Reaction." 

In the 1980 alternate history novel The Probability Broach as part of the North American Confederacy Series by L. Neil Smith , Albert Gallatin joins the rebellion in 1794 to benefit the farmers, rather than the fledgling US Government like he does in reality. This results in the rebellion becoming a Second American Revolution . This eventually leads to George Washington being overthrown and executed for treason, the abrogation of the Constitution , and Gallatin being proclaimed the second president with him serving as president until 1812. In 1795, a new caretaker government is established and a revised version of the Articles of Confederation is ratified in 1797, but with a much greater emphasis on individual and economic freedom. As a result, the United States eventually becomes a libertarian utopia called the North American Confederacy in 1893. [115] [116] 

In 2011 the Whiskey Rebellion Festival was started in Washington, Pennsylvania . This annual event is held in July and includes live music, food and historic reenactments, featuring the "tar and feathering" of the tax collector. [117] [118] See also Liquor portal History portal Pittsburgh portal American Whiskey Trail " Copper Kettle ", song referencing the rebellion Fries's Rebellion Jean Bonnet Tavern List of incidents of civil unrest in the United States Moonshine Rum Rebellion , a coup d'état which occurred in colonial New South Wales Shays' Rebellion The Whiskey Rebels , 2008 historical novel by David Liss Notes ^ Sources show a variety of spellings for his surname, including Vigol and Wigal References 

Pinpoint citations ^ Slaughter, 210–214, 219. ^ Robert W. Coakley, The Role of Federal Military Forces in Domestic Disorders, 1789–1878 (DIANE Publishing, 1996), 67. ^ Leon Howlett, The Kentucky Bourbon Experience: A Visual Tour of Kentucky's Bourbon Distilleries , 2012, 6. ^ Rorabaugh, W.J. The Alcoholic Republic: An American Tradition , 1979. Oxford University Press, 53. ^ Howlett, Leon The Kentucky Bourbon Experience: A Visual Tour of Kentucky's Bourbon Distilleries , 2012, 7. ^ Chernow, 297. ^ Chernow, 327–30. ^ Chernow, 341. ^ Hogeland, 27. ^ Chernow, 342–43; Hogeland, 63. ^ Slaughter, 100. ^ Slaughter, 105; Hogeland, 64. ^ American State Papers [Finance: Volume 1], 110 ^ Slaughter, 97. ^ Hogeland, 66. ^ Hogeland, 68. ^ Hogeland, 67; Holt, 30. ^ Slaughter, 147–49; Hogeland, 68–70. ^ Hogeland, 68–69; Holt, 30. ^ Slaughter, 148. ^ Slaughter, 148; Hogeland, 69. ^ Slaughter, 108. ^ Slaughter, 110. ^ Slaughter, 206. ^ Hogeland, 23–25; Slaughter, 113. ^ Hogeland, 24. ^ Hogeland, 114–15. ^ Slaughter, 113. Hogeland dates the attack on Johnson to 7 September, the night before the Pittsburgh convention; Hogeland, 24. ^ Hogeland, 103–04. ^ Slaughter, 114. ^ Slaughter, 103. ^ a b Mary K. Bonsteel Tachau, "A New Look at the Whiskey Rebellion", in Boyd, The Whiskey Rebellion: Past and Present Perspectives , 97–118. ^ Slaughter, 117. ^ Gross, David M. (2014). 99 Tactics of Successful Tax Resistance Campaigns . Picket Line Press. pp. 77–78. ISBN 978-1490572741 . ^ Slaughter, 119; Hogeland, 124. ^ Hogeland, 122–23. ^ Hogeland, 117–19; 122–23. ^ Slaughter, 125–27. ^ Slaughter, 119–23. ^ Slaughter, 151–53. ^ Hogeland, 97, 102. ^ Hogeland, 119–24. ^ Gross, David M. (2014). 99 Tactics of Successful Tax Resistance Campaigns . Picket Line Press. p. 72. ISBN 978-1490572741 . ^ Hogeland, 130–31. ^ a b Slaughter, 151. ^ Slaughter, 150. ^ Slaughter, 153. ^ Slaughter, 165. ^ Slaughter, 177; Cooke, 328. ^ Hogeland, 142. ^ Slaughter, 170. ^ Slaughter, 182. ^ Cooke, 321. ^ Cooke, 321–22. ^ Slaughter, 183. ^ Hogeland, 124. ^ Hogeland, passim . For an online summary of Hogeland's argument, see his "Why the Whiskey Rebellion Is Worth Recalling Now" ; History News Network, July 3, 2006. Accessed June 22, 2010. ^ S. E. Morison, "The Oxford History of the United States 1783–1917 (London: Oxford University Press, 1927), 182. ^ Slaughter, 177. ^ Hogeland, 146. ^ The number of militiamen in the first attack on Bower Hill varies in contemporary accounts; Hogeland, 268. ^ Slaughter, 179; Hogeland, 147–48. ^ Slaughter, 3. ^ Hogeland, 150–51. ^ Slaughter, 179; Hogeland, 152. ^ Hogeland, 153. ^ Hogeland, 153–54; Slaughter, 3, 179–80. ^ Slaughter, 180. ^ Hogeland, 155–56. ^ Slaughter, 181–83. ^ Slaughter, 183–85. ^ Slaughter, 186; Hogeland, 172. ^ Slaughter, 188. ^ Slaughter, 186–87. ^ Slaughter, 187. ^ Slaughter, 188–89; Hogeland, 169. ^ Holt, 10. Holt writes that earlier historians had misindentified the six counties represented by the flag. ^ Slaughter, 185. ^ Slaughter, 187–88; Hogeland, 170–77. ^ a b "Whiskey Point – PHMC Historical Markers" (Database search) . Historical Marker Database . Pennsylvania Historical Museum Commission . Retrieved December 12, 2013 . ^ Holt, 54–57. ^ Slaughter, 188–89. ^ Elkins McKitrick, 479. ^ Slaughter, 197–99. ^ Slaughter, 199; Holt, 11. ^ Elkins McKitrick, 481. ^ Mark G. Spencer, "Democratic-Republican Societies", in Peter Knight, ed., Conspiracy Theories in American History (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO Press, 2003), 1:221. ^ Slaughter, 192–93, 196; Elkins McKitrick, 479. ^ Slaughter, 196. ^ Slaughter, 199–200; Hogeland, 199. ^ a b Slaughter, 203. ^ Hogeland, 205–06. ^ Chernow, 475–76; Hogeland, 189. ^ Slaughter, 210-14. ^ Slaughter, 208. ^ Slaughter, 205–06; Hogeland, 213. ^ Ellis, His Excellency, George Washington , 225. ^ Manella, Angela. "Jonathan Forman Papers Finding Aid" . Archive Service Center, University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 4 April 2013 . ^ Forman, Jonathan. "Journal of Jonathan Forman, September 21, 1794 – October 25, 1794" (PDF) . Retrieved 4 April 2013 . ^ Slaughter, 215–16. ^ Slaughter, 216. ^ Slaughter, 219. ^ Richard A. Ifft, "Treason in the Early Republic: The Federal Courts, Popular Protest, and Federalism During the Whiskey Insurrection", in Boyd, The Whiskey Rebellion: Past and Present Perspectives , 172. ^ Ifft, 172. ^ Hogeland, 238; Ifft, 176. ^ Ifft, 175–76. ^ Elkins McKitrick, 481–84. ^ Boyd, "Popular Rights", 78. ^ Slaughter, 221; Boyd, "Popular Rights", 80. ^ Hogeland, 242. ^ Christian G. Fritz, American Sovereigns: the People and America's Constitutional Tradition Before the Civil War , ch. 6. ^ Boyd, "Popular Rights", 80–83. ^ Anita Vickers, The New Nation (Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood, 2002), 213. ^ Susan Branson, These Fiery Frenchified Dames: Women and Political Culture in Early National Philadelphia (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2001), 181. ^ John J. Pierce, When world views collide: a study in imagination and evolution (Greenwood Press, 1989), 163. ^ Peter Josef Mühlbauer, "Frontiers and dystopias: Libertarian ideology in science fiction", in Dieter Plehwe et al., eds., Neoliberal Hegemony: A Global Critique (Taylor Francis, 2006), 162. ^ "Washington Co. Festival Marks Whiskey Rebellion" . WPXI . August 1, 2011 . Retrieved March 23, 2015 . ^ "About" . Whiskey Rebellion Festival . Retrieved March 23, 2015 . 

Works frequently cited Boyd, Steven R., ed. The Whiskey Rebellion: Past and Present Perspectives . Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1985. ISBN 0-313-24534-7 . Boyd, Steven R. "The Whiskey Rebellion, Popular Rights, and the Meaning of the First Amendment." In W. Thomas Mainwaring, ed. The Whiskey Rebellion and the Trans-Appalachian Frontier , 73–84. Washington, Pennsylvania: Washington and Jefferson College, 1994. Chernow, Ron. Alexander Hamilton . New York: Penguin Press, 2004. ISBN 1-59420-009-2 . Cooke, Jacob E. "The Whiskey Insurrection: A Re-Evaluation." Pennsylvania History 30 (July 1963), 316–64. Elkins, Stanley M. and Eric L. McKitrick. The Age of Federalism . Oxford University Press, 1995. ISBN 978-0-19-509381-0 Hogeland, William. The Whiskey Rebellion: George Washington, Alexander Hamilton, and the Frontier Rebels Who Challenged America's Newfound Sovereignty . New York: Scribner, 2006. ISBN 0-7432-5490-2 . Holt, Wythe. "The Whiskey Rebellion of 1794: A Democratic Working-Class Insurrection" . Paper presented at The Georgia Workshop in Early American History and Culture , 2004. Kohn, Richard H. "The Washington Administration's Decision to Crush the Whiskey Rebellion." Journal of American History 59 (December 1972), 567–84. Slaughter, Thomas P. The Whiskey Rebellion: Frontier Epilogue to the American Revolution . Oxford University Press, 1986. ISBN 0-19-505191-2 . Further reading Baldwin, Leland. Whiskey Rebels: The Story of a Frontier Uprising . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1939. Bouton, Terry. Taming Democracy: "The People," the Founders, and the Troubled Ending of the American Revolution . Oxford New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-19-530665-1 . Brackenridge, Henry Marie . History of the Western Insurrection in Western Pennsylvania.... Pittsburgh, 1859. Brackenridge, Hugh Henry . Incidents of the Insurrection in Western Pennsylvania in the Year 1794 . Philadelphia, 1795. A 1972 edition has notes by Daniel Marder. Findley, William . History of the Insurrection in the Four Western Counties of Pennsylvania . Philadelphia, 1796. External links Text of the 1791 excise act from the Library of Congress George Washington's Proclamation of September 15, 1792 , warning against obstruction of the excise law, from the Avalon Project at Yale Law School Washington's Proclamation of August 7, 1794 , announcing the preliminary raising of militia and commanding the insurgents in western Pennsylvania to disperse Washington's Proclamation of September 25, 1794 , announcing the commencement of military operations Washington's Sixth Annual Message , November 19, 1794. Washington dedicated most of this annual message to the Whiskey Rebellion. Thompson, Charles D. Jr. "Whiskey and Geography" Southern Spaces , May 10, 2011. Explores the origins of whiskey-making and the resistance to a whiskey tax in Franklin County, Virginia. v t e Whiskey Rebellion People Alexander Addison Hugh Henry Brackenridge David Bradford William Findley Thomas Gaddis Albert Gallatin Herman Husband Robert Philson John Smilie John Wilkins, Jr. Places Western Pennsylvania Andrew Rabb House Bethel Presbyterian Church Black Horse Tavern David Bradford House Defibaugh Tavern Huffman Distillery and Chopping Mill John Corbley Farm Mingo Creek Presbyterian Church and Churchyard Oliver Miller Homestead Lobb's Cemetery and Yohogania County Courthouse Site William Crawford House Whiskey Point Legacy Wigle Whiskey The Whiskey Rebels " Copper Kettle " Wilderness Boy The Delectable Country The Latimers v t e Armed conflicts involving the United States Armed Forces listed chronologically Domestic Shays' Rebellion Whiskey Rebellion Fries's Rebellion Mormon War Dorr Rebellion Bleeding Kansas Utah War Civil War Indian Wars Brooks–Baxter War Range War Lincoln County War Johnson County War Coal Creek War Homestead Strike Battle of Blair Mountain Bonus Army Battle of Athens Foreign Revolutionary War Quasi-War First Barbary War War of 1812 Second Barbary War First Sumatran expedition Second Sumatran expedition Ivory Coast Expedition Mexican–American War First Fiji Expedition Second Opium War Second Fiji Expedition Formosa Expedition Korean Expedition Spanish–American War Philippine–American War Boxer Rebellion Banana Wars Border War World War I Russian Civil War World War II Korean War Vietnam War Invasion of the Dominican Republic Invasion of Grenada Lebanese Civil War Invasion of Panama Gulf War Somali Civil War Bosnian War Kosovo War Afghanistan War Iraq War War in North-West Pakistan Libyan Civil War Intervention against ISIL Iraq Syria Cameroon Libya Related articles List of conflicts in the U.S. List of wars involving the U.S. Timeline of U.S. military operations Length of U.S. participation in major wars Overseas expansion Military history Covert regime-change actions Casualties of war Peace movement List of anti-war organizations Conscientious objector v t e George Washington 1st President of the United States , 1789–1797 Senior Officer of the Army, 1798–1799 Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army , 1775–1783 Second Continental Congress, 1775 First Continental Congress, 1774 Military career 

Revolutionary War Military career French and Indian War Jumonville Glen Battle of Fort Necessity Forbes Expedition Washington and the American Revolution Commander-in-chief, Continental Army Boston campaign Siege of Boston New York and New Jersey campaign Delaware River crossing Battle of Trenton Philadelphia campaign Valley Forge Battles of Saratoga Yorktown campaign Siege of Yorktown Culper spy ring Newburgh Conspiracy Newburgh letter Established, Badge of Military Merit Purple Heart Aides-de-Camp Commander-in-Chief's headquarters Morristown and Ford Mansion Horses: Nelson and Blueskin Other U.S. 

founding events 1769 Virginia Association Continental Association 1774 Fairfax Resolves Court of Appeals in Cases of Capture 1785 Mount Vernon Conference Chairman, 1787 Constitutional Convention Presidency United States presidential election, 1788–89 1792 First inauguration inaugural bible Second inauguration Title of "Mr. President" Cabinet of the United States Secretary of State Attorney General Secretary of the Treasury Secretary of War Judiciary Act of 1789 Nonintercourse Act Whiskey Rebellion Militia Acts of 1792 Coinage Act of 1792 United States Mint Proclamation of Neutrality Neutrality Act of 1794 Jay Treaty Pinckney's Treaty Slave Trade Act of 1794 Residence Act Thanksgiving Proclamation Farewell Address State of the Union Address 1790 1791 1792 1793 1796 Cabinet Federal judicial appointments Views and 

public image Presidential library The Washington Papers Religious views Washington and slavery Town Destroyer Legacy Life and homes Early life Birthplace Ferry Farm boyhood home Mount Vernon Gristmill Woodlawn Plantation Samuel Osgood House, First Presidential Mansion Alexander Macomb House, Second Presidential Mansion President's House, Philadelphia Germantown White House Custis estate Potomac Company James River and Kanawha Canal Mountain Road Lottery Congressional Gold Medal Thanks of Congress President General, Society of the Cincinnati Washington College Washington and Lee University Memorials and 

depictions Washington, D.C. Washington state Washington Monument Mount Rushmore Washington's Birthday Purple Heart The Apotheosis of Washington George Washington (Houdon) George Washington (Ceracchi) Washington Crossing the Delaware Unfinished portrait Lansdowne portrait The Washington Family portrait Washington at Princeton painting George Washington University Washington University Washington Masonic National Memorial George Washington Memorial Parkway George Washington Bridge Washington and Jefferson National Forests Washington Monument, Baltimore Washington, D.C. statue List of monuments List of places U.S. Postage stamps Washington-Franklin Issues 1932 bicentennial Currency Washington quarter Washington dollar Cultural depictions George Washington (1984 miniseries 1986 sequel) Related Bibliography Founding Fathers of the United States Republicanism Federalist Party Federalist Era Virginia dynasty Coat of arms Cherry-tree anecdote River Farm Washington's Crossing 1751 Barbados trip Category Syng inkstand General of the Armies American Philosophical Society American Revolution patriots Mount Vernon Ladies' Association Ancestry 

and family Martha Washington (wife) John Parke Custis (stepson) George Washington Parke Custis (step-grandson, adopted son) Eleanor Parke Custis (step-granddaughter, adopted daughter) Augustine Washington (father) Mary Ball (mother) Lawrence Washington (half-brother) Augustine Washington Jr. (half-brother) Betty Washington Lewis (sister) Samuel Washington (brother) John A. Washington (brother) Charles Washington (brother) Lawrence Washington (grandfather) John Washington (great-grandfather) Bushrod Washington (nephew) John Adams → Category v t e Alexander Hamilton Senior Officer of the United States Army, 1799–1800 1st Secretary of the Treasury, 1789–1795 Delegate, Congress of the Confederation, 1782–1783, 1788–1789 United States 

founding events A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress (1774) The Farmer Refuted (1775) Delegate, 1786 Annapolis Convention Delegate, 1787 Constitutional Convention Initiated, main author, The Federalist Papers written by Hamilton Founding Father Secretary of 

the Treasury First Bank of the United States Revenue Marine (United States Coast Guard) United States Customs Service Hamiltonian economic program Residence Act Compromise of 1790 "First Report on the Public Credit", 1790 Funding Act of 1790 "Operations of the Act Laying Duties on Imports", 1790 "Second Report on Public Credit", a.k.a. "Report on a National Bank", 1790 "Report On Manufactures", 1791 Tariff of 1790 Tariff of 1792 Coinage Act of 1792 United States Mint Whiskey Rebellion Jay Treaty Military career New York Provincial Company of Artillery In the Revolutionary War Battles: Harlem Heights White Plains Trenton General Washington's Aide-de-Camp Princeton Brandywine Germantown Monmouth Siege of Yorktown Other events Founder, Federalist Party Federalist Era Founder, Bank of New York Bank of North America Advisor, George Washington's Farewell Address President-General, Society of the Cincinnati Founder, New-York Evening Post Hamilton–Reynolds sex scandal Rutgers v. Waddington Life Liberty Hall Hamilton Grange Home and National Memorial Hamilton-Oneida Academy Relationship with slavery Burr–Hamilton duel Trinity Church Cemetery Legacy and 

popular culture Alexander Hamilton statue, Washington D.C. Alexander Hamilton statue, Central Park, New York City model United States ten-dollar bill Postage stamps Alexander Hamilton (1931 film) Liberty! (1997 documentary series) Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series) John Adams (2008 miniseries) Hamilton (2015 musical) Hamilton Hall, Salem, Massachusetts Hamilton Hall, Columbia University Fort Hamilton Alexander Hamilton High School Alexander Hamilton Bridge Hamilton Heights, Manhattan Related Age of Enlightenment American Enlightenment American Philosophical Society New York Manumission Society African Free School "American System" economic plan American School American Revolution patriots Family Elizabeth Schuyler (wife) Philip Hamilton (son) Alexander Hamilton Jr. (son) James Alexander Hamilton (son) John Church Hamilton (son) William S. Hamilton (son) Schuyler Hamilton (grandson) Robert Ray Hamilton (great-grandson) v t e History of the United States Timeline Prehistory Pre-Columbian Colonial 1776–89 1789–1849 1849–65 1865–1918 1918–45 1945–64 1964–80 1980–91 1991–present Topics American Century Cities Constitution Demographic Diplomatic Economic Education Immigration Native American Asian American African American Indian American Jewish Mexican American Medical Merchant Marine Military Musical Polish Religious Slavery Southern Technological and industrial Territorial acquisitions Territorial evolution Voting rights Women Category Portal v t e Tax resistance Topics Conscientious objection to military taxation List of historical acts of tax resistance List of tax resisters Methods Barter Gift economy Local currency Rebellion Self-sufficiency Simple living Tax avoidance Tax evasion Unreported employment Organizations Addiopizzo Aide-toi, le ciel t'aidera All Britain Anti-Poll Tax Federation Anti-Poll Tax Unions Association of Real Estate Taxpayers Catalunya Diu Prou Committee for Non-Violent Action Δεν Πληρώνω Fasci Siciliani Irish National Land League National Campaign for a Peace Tax Fund National War Tax Resistance Coordinating Committee Northern California War Tax Resistance Pagal Panthis Peace churches Peacemakers Planka.nu Women's Tax Resistance League Media An Act of Conscience Civil Disobedience Clericis laicos The Cold War and the Income Tax: A Protest Vyborg Manifesto Campaigns 1300s Harelle Peasants' Revolt 1400s Cornish Rebellion of 1497 1500s Croquant rebellions Rappenkrieg Revolt of the Pitauds 1600s Angelets Revolt of the papier timbré Revolt of the va-nu-pieds Salt Tax Revolt 1700s Boston Tea Party Fries's Rebellion Gaspee Affair No taxation without representation Philadelphia Tea Party War of the Regulation Whiskey Rebellion White Lotus Rebellion 1800s Dog Tax War Hut Tax War of 1898 Rebecca Riots Saminism Movement Tancament de Caixes Tithe War 1900s Agbekoya Bambatha Rebellion Bardoli Satyagraha Beit Sahour Bondelswarts affair Champaran and Kheda Satyagraha Johnson cult Mau movement Poll Tax Riots Poplar Rates Rebellion Turra Coo Salt March Women's War 21st century Anti-austerity movement in Greece Anti-Bin Tax Campaign Bonnets Rouges Campaign Against Home and Water Taxes Movimento Passe Livre Related topics Civil disobedience Conscientious objector Direct action Income tax threshold Nonviolent resistance Render unto Caesar Tax noncompliance Tax protester Tax riot Taxation as slavery Taxation as theft v t e Pittsburgh History Timeline Culture Dialect Media Neighborhoods Notable people Skyscrapers Government Airport Conventions City Hall Courthouse Mayor Council Events InterGov Police D.A. Sheriff Fire Libraries Transit Education Port Regional Economy Allegheny Conference Duquesne Club Chamber of Commerce Economic Club HYP Club Stock Exchange Fortune 500 

headquarters US Steel PNC PPG Heinz Mylan WESCO Consol Dick's Allegheny Technologies Forbes' largest 84 Lumber Giant Eagle Other headquarters American Bridge American Eagle Ampco Ansys Armstrong Black Box Calgon Carbon ChemAdvisor Compunetix Dollar Bank DQE Eat'n Park Education Management Corporation EQT Federated GNC Guru.com Highmark IGATE Iron City Kennametal Koppers Laughlin MARC USA Millcraft MSA Niche.com Oxford PTC Renda rue21 UPMC Vocelli Wabtec Shared headquarters Alcoa ModCloth Nova Chemicals Subsidiary headquarters Allegheny Energy Bayer Corporation FedEx Ground GlaxoSmithKline USA Lanxess Respironics Vivisimo Westinghouse Regional operations AA BNY Mellon (formerly Mellon Financial ) Dreyfus Eaton Spreadshirt Macy's Historic Big Wheel Clark Dravo Fisher Integra Mesta Murphy Gulf Oil J L Ketchum Rockwell Sunbeam Westinghouse Sports Dapper Dan Grand Prix Great Race Head of the Ohio Lore Marathon Mylan Classic Regatta WPHL Baseball Pirates Wild Things Panthers Dukes Chronicle-Telegraph Cup Allegheny Burghers Champions Crawfords Grays Hardhats Keystones Stogies Rebels Basketball Yellow Jackets Panthers (m) Panthers (w) Dukes (m) Dukes (w) Colonials (m) Colonials (w) Roundball Classic Condors Ironmen Loendi Monticello Phantoms Pipers Piranhas Pirates Rens Xplosion Football Steelers Panthers Steeler Nation heritage Colts Force Passion Renegades Allegheny Americans A's Duquesne Gladiators Homestead Lyceum Maulers Power Odds Olympics Quakers JP Stars Early Pro Football Circuit Hockey Penguins Colonials (m) Colonials (w) Three Rivers Classic A's Bankers Cougars Duquesne Ft. Pitt Hornets Keystones Lyceum Panthers Phantoms Pirates Pirates (WPHL) Pros Shamrocks Victorias Winter Garden Yellow Jackets Soccer Riverhounds Beadling Cannons Hurricanes Phantoms Spirit Other Sledgehammers Bulls Harlequins PCC Triangles Wallabies Studio Wrestling Venues PPG Paints Arena Heinz Field PNC Park 84 Lumber Arena Fitzgerald Field House Highmark Stadium Palumbo Center Petersen Events Center Petersen Sports Complex Rooney Field Sewall Center Trees Hall Central Park Civic Arena Duquesne Gardens Exposition Park Forbes Field Josh Gibson Field Greenlee Field Motor Square Garden Pitt Stadium Recreation Park Schenley Gardens Three Rivers Winter Garden Parks Allegheny Arsenal Allegheny Commons Allegheny Riverfront ArtGardens Buhl Community Chatham University Arboretum Frank Curto Frick Emerald View Highland Market Square Mellon Mellon Green Mellon Square North Shore Riverfront Phillips Point of View Point State PPG Place Riverview Roberto Clemente Memorial Rodef Shalom Biblical Botanical Garden Schenley Schenley Plaza South Shore Riverfront South Side Three Rivers West End Overlook Westinghouse Transportation Inclines Steps v t e Port Authority of Allegheny County Light rail 

( List of stations ) Blue Line – Library Blue Line – South Hills Village Red Line 



Inclines 

( Historical list ) Duquesne Incline Monongahela Incline Buses and busways 

( List of routes ) Martin Luther King Jr. East Busway South Busway West Busway Former lines 47 Drake Brown Line PATrain Skybus Other North Shore Connector Port Authority 4000 Series PCC Wabash Tunnel v t e Public transportation in Greater Pittsburgh Bus services Port Authority of Allegheny County list of bus routes Beaver Butler Fayette IndiGO Mid Mon Valley Mountain Line New Castle Town Country University of Pittsburgh Washington Westmoreland Bus rapid transit MLK Jr. East Busway South Busway West Busway Light rail Red Line Blue Line Library South Hills Village Inclines Duquesne Monongahela Amtrak Capitol Limited Pennsylvanian Airports Pittsburgh International Arnold Palmer Allegheny County Beaver Butler Eddie Dew Greensburg Jeannette Herron Jefferson Jimmy Stewart Joe Hardy Lakehill Monroeville New Castle Rock Rostraver Washington Wheeling Zelienople Discontinued Broadway Limited Brown Line List of streetcar routes in Pittsburgh Parkway Limited PATrain Skybus v t e Tunnels and bridges in Pittsburgh Tunnels Allegheny River Tunnel Armstrong Tunnel Cork Run Tunnel Corliss Tunnel Fort Pitt Tunnel J L Tunnel Liberty Tunnel Mount Washington Transit Tunnel Pittsburgh and Castle Shannon Tunnel Pittsburgh Steubenville Extension Railroad Tunnel Schenley Tunnel Squirrel Hill Tunnel Wabash Tunnel Bridges 30th Street Bridge 31st Street Bridge 33rd Street Railroad Bridge 40th Street Bridge Bloomfield Bridge Birmingham Bridge David McCullough Bridge Fort Duquesne Bridge Fort Pitt Bridge Fort Wayne Railroad Bridge Glenwood Bridge Glenwood B O Railroad Bridge Highland Park Bridge Homestead Grays Bridge Hot Metal Bridge Liberty Bridge McKees Rocks Bridge Panhandle Bridge Panther Hollow Bridge Schenley Bridge Senator Robert D. Fleming Bridge Smithfield Street Bridge South Tenth Street Bridge Three Sisters Roberto Clemente Bridge Andy Warhol Bridge Rachel Carson Bridge Veterans Bridge West End Bridge Attractions Aviary Baywood Cathedral of Learning Chinatown Conservatory Dippy Immaculate Heart Duquesne Incline Heinz Chapel Little Italy Mellon Institute Mon Incline Observatory Pamela's Penn Station Primanti's Science Center Steps USS Requin Zoo Kennywood Luna Park Westinghouse Sign Landmarks National (City) National (County) State City PHLF Cultural Museums Art Arts Arts Festival Bible Fort Pitt Blockhouse Clayton Clemente Children's Frick Glass Center History Jazz Jewish Mattress Factory Dental Miller Miss Pittsburgh Nationality Rooms National Map Natural History Soldiers Sailors Warhol Wilson WSG Venues Heinz Hall Benedum Byham Harris Kelly-Strayhorn New Hazlett O'Reilly Foster Playhouse Trib Hunt Stage AE Syria Mosque Nixon Theater Festivals Anthrocon Arts Blues Comicon Fashion Film Folk Handmade New Works Tekko Whiskey Fine Spirits Wine Shopping and entertainment Casino Gateway Clipper Fleet Station Square Strip Downtown Oakland South Side Macy's Market Square Southside Works Waterworks Mount Washington East Liberty Squirrel Hill Shadyside Walnut Street Opera Ballet Symphony Brass Classical Theatre Dance Ensemble Caravan Theatre Folk Light Opera Opera Theater Jewish Theatre Public Theater Playwrights Musical Theater Stage Right Youth Ballet Youth Symphony Bricolage NNOC v t e Shopping malls in Pittsburgh Enclosed Beaver Valley Mall The Block Northway Century III Mall The Galleria of Mt. Lebanon The Mall at Robinson Monroeville Mall Pittsburgh Mills Ross Park Mall South Hills Village Station Square Uniontown Mall Warner Centre Washington Crown Center Westmoreland Mall Lifestyle / 

Outdoor Bakery Square Edgewood Towne Centre Ellsworth Avenue McCandless Crossing Northern Lights Robinson Town Centre Settlers Ridge SouthSide Works Walnut Street The Waterfront Waterworks Mall Outlet Grove City Premium Outlets Tanger Outlets Pittsburgh Defunct Allegheny Center Mall East Hills Shopping Center (Eastgate Commerce Center) Eastland Mall Greengate Mall Parkway Center Mall Village Square Mall Washington Mall Colleges and universities Pitt Carnegie Mellon Duquesne Robert Morris Chatham Point Park Carlow Art Institute Byzantine Catholic Seminary Pittsburgh Theological Seminary St. Paul Seminary CCAC Culture of Pittsburgh Cookie table Jewish history Iron City Brewing Company Jagoff Joe Magarac Mister Rogers' Neighborhood Mr. Yuk Parking chairs Pittsburgh left Pittsburgh toilet Robot Hall of Fame Steeler Nation Book Category Portal (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.log.warn("Gadget \"teahouse\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"ReferenceTooltips\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");mw.log.warn("Gadget \"featured-articles-links\" styles loaded twice. Migrate to type=general. See \u003Chttps://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T42284\u003E.");}); Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Whiskey_Rebellion oldid=740336390 " Categories : Pennsylvania state historical marker significations Whiskey Rebellion 3rd United States Congress 18th-century rebellions 1790s in the United States 1794 in the United States Conflicts in 1794 History of Pennsylvania Presidency of George Washington Rebellions in the United States Tax resistance in the United States Alcohol in the United States Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use dmy dates from February 2014 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Беларуская Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 20 September 2016, at 12:25. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.loader.load(["ext.cite.a11y","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.action.view.postEdit","site","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.searchSuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.ReferenceTooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.DRN-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.refToolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.visualEditor.targetLoader","ext.eventLogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaEvents","ext.navigationTiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.centralNotice.geoIP","ext.centralNotice.startUp"]);}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set( { "wgPageParseReport": { "limitreport": { "cputime": "0.584", "walltime": "0.726", "ppvisitednodes": { "value": 6107, "limit": 1000000 }, "ppgeneratednodes": { "value": 0, "limit": 1500000 }, "postexpandincludesize": { "value": 525537, "limit": 2097152 }, "templateargumentsize": { "value": 56982, "limit": 2097152 }, "expansiondepth": { "value": 15, "limit": 40 }, "expensivefunctioncount": { "value": 5, "limit": 500 }, "entityaccesscount": { "value": 0, "limit": 400 }, "timingprofile": [ "100.00% 453.421 1 -total", " 21.65% 98.144 2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups", " 19.13% 86.728 2 Template:Reflist", " 18.07% 81.937 1 Template:Pittsburgh", " 15.88% 72.011 16 Template:Navbox", " 11.54% 52.331 1 Template:Infobox_PAhistoric", " 10.38% 47.067 1 Template:Infobox", " 9.47% 42.926 1 Template:Pp-vandalism", " 6.41% 29.051 2 Template:Cite_book", " 5.73% 25.984 2 Template:Military_navigation" ] }, "scribunto": { "limitreport-timeusage": { "value": "0.162", "limit": "10.000" }, "limitreport-memusage": { "value": 9350194, "limit": 52428800 } }, "cachereport": { "origin": "mw1253", "timestamp": "20161021005958", "ttl": 2592000, "transientcontent": false } } } );}); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgBackendResponseTime":818,"wgHostname":"mw1253"});});